
BELLES LETTRES

[The text below is based on a scan of the first published version of Eliot's essay, which appeared in The Westminster Review Old Series Vol. LXIV / New Series Vol. VII (July 1855): 151-66.]

EVERY one who was so happy as to go mushrooming in his early days, remembers his delight when, after picking up and throwing away heaps of dubious fungi, dear to naturalists but abhorred of cooks, he pounces on an unmistakable mushroom, with its delicate fragrance and pink lining tempting him to devour it there and then, to the prejudice of the promised dish for breakfast. We speak in parables, after the fashion of the wise, amongst whom Reviewers are always to be reckoned. The plentiful dubious fungi are the ordinary quarter's crop of novels, not all poisonous, but generally not appetizing, and certainly not nourishing; and the unmistakable mushroom is a new novel by Charles Kingsley. [1] It seemed too long since we had any of that genuine description of external nature, not done after the poet's or the novelist's recipe, but flowing from spontaneous observation and enjoyment; any of that close, vigorous painting of out-door life, which serves as myrrh and rich spices to embalm much perishable theorizing and offensive objurgation--too long since we had a taste of that exquisite lyrical inspiration to which we owe--

"O, Mary! go and call the cattle home 
Along the sands of Dee." 

After courses of "psychological" novels (very excellent things in their way), where life seems made up of talking and journalizing, and men are judged almost entirely on "carpet consideration," we are ready to welcome a stirring historical romance, by a writer who, poet and scholar and social reformer as he is, evidently knows the points of a horse and has followed the hounds, who betrays a fancy for pigs, and becomes dithyrambic on the virtues of tobacco. After a surfeit of Hebes and Psyches, or Madonnas and Magdalens, it is a refreshment to turn to Kiss's Amazon. But this ruddy and, now and then, rather ferocious barbarism, which is singularly compounded in Mr. Kingsley with the susceptibility of the poet and the warm sympathy of the philanthropist, while it gives his writings one of their principal charms, is also the source of their gravest fault. The battle and the chase seem necessary to his existence; and this Red Man's nature, planted in a pleasant rectory among corn fields and pastures, takes, in default of better game, to riding down capitalists and Jesuits, and fighting with that Protean personage--"the devil." 

If, however, Mother Nature has made Mr. Kingsley very much of a poet and philanthropist, and a little of a savage, her dry-nurse Habit has made him superlatively a preacher: he drops into the homily as readily as if he had been "to the manner born;" and while by his artistic faculty he can transplant you into whatever scene he will, he can never trust to the impression that scene itself will make on you, but, true to his cloth, must always "improve the occasion." In these two points--his fierce antagonism and his perpetual hortative tendency--lie, to our thinking, the grand mistakes which enfeeble the effect of all Mr. Kingsley's works, and are too likely to impede his production of what his high powers would otherwise promise--a fiction which might be numbered among our classics. Poet and artist in a rare degree, his passionate impetuosity and theological prepossessions inexorably forbid that he should ever be a philosopher; he sees, feels, and paints vividly, but he theorizes illogically and moralizes absurdly. If he would confine himself to his true sphere, he might be a teacher in the sense in which every great artist is a teacher--namely, by giving us his higher sensibility as a medium, a delicate acoustic or optical instrument, bringing home to our coarser senses what would otherwise be unperceived by us. 

But Mr. Kingsley, unhappily, like so many other gifted men, has two steeds--his Pegasus and his hobby: the one he rides with a graceful abandon, to the admiration of all beholders; but no sooner does he get astride the other, than he becomes a feeble imitator of Carlyle's manege, and attempts to put his wooden toy to all the wonderful paces of the great Scotchman's fiery Tartar horse. This imitation is probably not a conscious one, but arises simply from the fact, that Mr. Kingsley's impetuosity and Boanerges' vein give him an affinity for Carlyle's faults--his one-sided judgment of character and his undiscriminating fulminations against the men of the present as tried by some imaginary standard in the past. Carlyle's great merits Mr. Kingsley's powers are not fitted to achieve; his genius lies in another direction. He has not that piercing insight which every now and then flashes to the depth of things, and alternating as it does with the most obstinate one-sidedness, makes Carlyle a wonderful paradox of wisdom and wilfulness; he has not that awful sense of the mystery of existence which continually checks and chastens the denunciations of the Teufelsdrokh; still less has he the rich humour, the keen satire, and the tremendous word-missiles, which Carlyle hurls about as Milton's angels hurl the rocks. But Mr. Kingsley can scold; he can select one character for unmixed eulogy and another for unmitigated vituperation; he can undertake to depict a past age and try to make out that it was the pattern of all heroisms now utterly extinct; he can sneer at actual doings which are only a new form of the sentiments he vaunts as the peculiar possession of his pet period; can call his own opinion God, and the opposite opinion the Devil. Carlyle's love of the concrete makes him prefer any proper name rather than an abstraction, and we are accustomed to smile at this in him, knowing it to be mere Carlylian rhetoric; but with Mr. Kingsley, who has publicly made a vehement disclaimer of all heterodoxy, and wishes to be understood as believing "all the doctrines of the Catholic Church," we must interpret such phraseology more literally. But enough of general remarks. 

Let us turn to the particular work before us, where we shall find all the writer's merits and faults in full blow. We abstain on principle from telling the story of novels, which seems to us something like stealing geraniums from your friend's flower-pot to stick in your own button-hole: you spoil the effect of his plant, and you secure only a questionable ornament for yourself. We shall therefore be careful to give the reader no hint of the domestic story around which Mr. Kingsley has grouped the historical scenes and characters of "Westward Ho!"

Hardly any period could furnish a happier subject for an historical fiction than the one Mr. Kingsley has here chosen. It is unhackneyed, and it is unsurpassed in the grandeur of its moral elements, and the picturesqueness and romance of its manners and events. Mr. Kingsley has not only brought genius but much labour to its illustration. He has fed his strong imagination with all accessible material, and given care not only to the grand figures and incidents but to small details. One sees that he knows and loves his Devonshire at first hand, and he has evidently lingered over the description of the forests and savannahs and rivers of the New World, until they have become as vividly present to him as if they were part of his own experience. We dare not pronounce on the merit of his naval descriptions, but to us, landlubbers as we are, they seem wonderfully real, and not to smack at all of technicalities learned by rote over the desk. He has given a careful and loving study to the history and literature of the period, and whatever misrepresentation there is in the book, is clearly not due to ignorance but to prepossession: if he misrepresents, it is not because he has omitted to examine, but because he has examined through peculiar spectacles. In the construction of a story, Mr. Kingsley has never been felicitous; and the feebleness of his denouements have been matters of amazement, even to his admirers. In this respect, "Westward Ho!" though by no means criticism-proof, is rather an advance on his former works, especially in the winding-up. It is true, this winding-up reminds us a little of Jane Eyre, but we prefer a partially borrowed beauty to an original bathos, which was what Mr. Kingsley achieved in the later chapters of "Alton Locke" and "Yeast." 

Neither is humour his forte. His Jack Brimblecome is too much like a piece of fun obbligato, after the manner of Walter Scott, who remains the unequalled model of historical romanticists, however they may criticize him. Mr. Kingsley's necessity for strong loves and strong hatreds, and his determination to hold up certain persons as models, is an obstacle to his successful delineation of character, in which he might otherwise excel. As it is, we can no more believe in and love his men and women than we could believe in and love the pattern-boy at school, always cited as a rebuke to our aberrations. Amyas Leigh would be a real, loveable fellow enough if he were a little less exemplary, and if Mr. Kingsley would not make him a text to preach from, as we suppose he is accustomed to do with Joshua, Gideon, and David. Until he shakes off this parsonic habit he will not be able to create truly human characters, or to write a genuine historical romance. 

Where his prepossessions do not come into play, where he is not dealing with his model heroes, or where the drama turns on a single passion or motive, he can scarcely be rivalled in truthfulness and beauty of presentation; for in clothing passion with action and language, and in he conception of all that gives local colouring, he has his best gifts to aid him. Beautiful is that episode of Mr. Oxenham's love, told by Salvation Yeo! Very admirable, too, is the felicity with which Mr. Kingsley has seized the style and spirit of the Elizabethan writers, and reproduced them in the poetry and supposed quotations scattered through his story. But above all other charms in his writings, at least to us, is his scene-painting. Who does not remember the scene by the wood in "Alton Locke," or that of the hunt at the beginning of "Yeast?" And "Westward Ho!" is wealthy in still greater beauties of the same kind. Here is a perfect gem. After a description of the old house at Stow, the residence of Sir Richard Grenvile, we read:--

"From the house, on three sides, the hill sloped steeply down, and the garden where Sir Richard and Amyas wore walking gave a truly English prospect. At one turn, they could catch, over the western walls, a glimpse of the blue ocean flecked with passing sails; and at the next, spread far below them, range on range of fertile park, stately avenue, yellow autumn woodland, and purple heather moors, lapping over and over each other up the valley to the old British earthwork, which stood black and furze-grown on its conical peak; and standing out against the sky on the highest bank of hill which closed the valley to the east, the lofty tower of Kilkhampton church, rich with the monuments and offerings of five centuries of Grenviles. A yellow eastern haze hung soft over park, and wood, and moor; the red cattle lowed to each other as they stood brushing away the flies in the rivulet far below; the colts in the horse-park close on their right whinnied as they played together, and their sires from the Queen's park on the opposite hill, answered them in fuller though fainter voices. A rutting stag made the still woodland rattle with his hoarse thunder, and a rival far up the valley gave back a trumpet note of defiance, and was himself defied from heathery brows which quivered far away above, half seen through the veil of eastern mist. And close at home, upon the terrace before the house, amid romping spaniels and golden-haired children, sat Lady Grenvile herself, the beautiful St. Leger of Annery, the central jewel of all that glorious place, and looked down at her noble children, and then up at her more noble husband, and round at the broad paradise of the west, till life seemed too full of happiness, and heaven of light."

It is pleasanter to linger over beauties such as these, than to point out faults; but unhappily, Mr. Kingsley's faults are likely to do harm in other ways than in subtracting from the lustre of his fame, and a faithful reviewer must lift up his voice against them, whether men "will hear, or whether they will forbear." Who that has any knowledge of our history and literature--that has felt his heart beat high at the idea of great crises and great deeds--that has any true recognition of the greatest poetry, and some of the greatest thoughts enshrined in our language, is not ready to pay the tribute of enthusiastic reverence to the Elizabethan age? In his glowing picture of that age, Mr. Kingsley would have carried with him all minds in which there is a spark of nobleness, if he could have freed himself from the spirit of the partisan, and been content to admit that in the Elizabethan age, as in every other, human beings, human parties, and human deeds arc made up of the most subtly intermixed good and evil. The battle of Armageddon in which all the saints are to fight on one side, has never yet come. It is perfectly true that, at certain epochs, the relations and tendencies of ideas and events are so clearly made out to minds of any superiority, that the best and ablest men are for the most part ranged under one banner: there was a point at which it must have become disgraceful to a cultivated mind not to accept the Copernican system, and in these days we are unable to draw any favourable inference concerning the intellect or morals of a man who advocates capital punishment for sheep-stealing or forgery. But things have never come to this pass with regard to Catholicism and Protestantism; and even supposing they had, Mr. Kingsley's ethics seem to resemble too closely those of his bugbears the Dominicans, when he implies that it is a holy work for the "Ayes" to hunt down the "Noes" like so many beasts of prey. His view of history seems not essentially to differ from that we have all held in our childish days, when it seemed perfectly easy to us to divide mankind into the sheep and the goats, when we devoutly believed that our favourite heroes, Wallace and Bruce, and all who fought on their side, were "good," while Edward and his soldiers were all "wicked;" that all the champions of the Reformation were of unexceptionable private character, and all the adherents of Popery consciously vicious and base. Doubtless the Elizabethan age bore its peculiar fruit of excellence, as every age has done which forms a nodus, a ganglion, in the historical development of humanity-- as the age of Pericles produced the divinest sculptures, or the ago of the Roman Republic the severe grandeur of Roman law and Roman patriotism, or as the core of the Middle Ages held the germ of chivalrous honour and reverential love. Doubtless the conquest of the Spanish Armada was virtually the triumph of light and freedom over darkness and bondage. What then? Is this a reason why Mr. Kingsley should seem almost angry with us for not believing with the men of that day in the golden city of Manoa and the Gulf-stream, or scold by anticipation any one who shall dare to congratulate himself on being undeceived in these matters? Doubtless Drake, Hawkins, Frobisher, and the rest, were brave, energetic men--men of great will and in some sort of great faculty; but like all other human agents, they "builded better than they knew;" and it would be as rational to suppose that the bee is an entomological Euclid, interested only in the solution of a problem, as to suppose that the motives of these mariners were as grand as the results of their work.

We had marked several passages as specimens of the small success which attends Mr. Kingsley in his favourite exercise of deducing a moral, but our want of space obliges us to renounce the idea of quoting them, with the exception of one, which, we think, will in some degree justify our low estimate of Mr. Kingsley's gift as a philosophizer. Here is the passage--

"Humboldt has somewhere a curious passage; in which, looking on some wretched group of Indians, squatting stupidly round their fires, besmeared with grease and paint, and devouring ants and clay, he somewhat naively remarks, that were it not for science, which teaches us that such is the crude material of humanity, and this the state from which we all have risen, he should have been tempted rather to look upon those hapless beings as the last degraded remnants of some fallen and dying race. One wishes that the great traveller had been bold enough to yield to that temptation, which his own reason and common sense presented to him as the real explanation of the sad sight, instead of following the dogmas of a so-called science, which has not a fact whereon to base its wild notion, and must ignore a thousand facts in asserting it. His own good sense, it seems, coincided instinctively with the Bible doctrine, that man in a state of nature is a fallen being, doomed to death--a view which may be a sad one, but still one more honourable to poor humanity than the theory, that we all began as some sort of two-handed apes. It is surely more hopeful to believe that these poor Otomacs or Guahibas were not what they ought to be, than to believe that they were. It is certainly more complimentary to them, to think that they had been somewhat nobler and more prudent in centuries gone by, than that they were such blockheads as to have dragged on, the son after the father, for all the thousands of years which have elapsed since man was made, without having had wit enough to discover any better food than ants and clay.

"Our voyagers, however, like those of their time, troubled their heads with no such questions. Taking the Bible story as they found it, they agreed with Humboldt's reason, and not with his science; or, to speak correctly, agreed with Humboldt's self, and not with the shallow anthropologic theories which happened to be in vogue fifty years ago; and their new hosts were in their eyes immortal souls like themselves, 'captived by the devil at his will,' lost there in the pathless forests, likely to be lost hereafter."

Note the accuracy of Mr. Kingsley's reasoning. Humboldt observes that, but for scientific data leading to an opposite conclusion, he could have imagined that a certain group of Indians were the remnants of a race which had sunk from a state of well-being to one of almost helpless barbarism. Hereupon Mr. Kingsley is sorry that Humboldt did not reject "the dogmas of the so-called science," and rest in this conception which "coincided with the Bible doctrine;" and he urges as one of his reasons for this regret, that it would be complimentary to the Otomacs and Guahibas to suppose that in centuries gone by, they had been nobler and more prudent. Now, so far as we are acquainted with the third chapter of Genesis, and with the copious exegeses of that chapter from St. Paul downwards, the "Bible doctrine" is not that man multiplied on the earth and formed communities and nations--amongst the rest, noble and prudent societies of Otomacs and Guahibas--in a state of innocence, and that then came the Fall. We have always understood that for the Fall "we may thank Adam," and that consequently the very first Otomac or Guahiba was already "captived by the devil," and "likely to be lost hereafter." Hence, what the question of the Otomacs and Guahibas having been nobler and more prudent in centuries gone by, can have to do with the doctrine of the Fall, we are at a loss to perceive. We will do no more than point to Mr. Kingsley's cool arrogance in asserting that a man like Humboldt, the patriarch of scientific investigators, is "misled by the dogmas of a so-called science, which has not a fact whereon to base its wild notions." Indeed it is rather saddening to dwell on the occasional absurdities into which anomalous opinions can betray a man of real genius; and after all, the last word we have to say of "Westward Ho!" is to thank Mr. Kingsley for the great and beautiful things we have found in it, as our dominant feeling towards his works in general is of that high admiration.

Next in interest to "Westward Ho!" at least among the English novels of the quarter, is "Constance Herbert."[2] Miss Jewsbury has created precedents for herself which make critics exacting towards her. We measure her work by her own standard, and find it deficient; when, if measured by the standard of ordinary feminine novelists, it would perhaps seem excellent. We meet with some beauties in it which, coming from the author of the "Half-Sisters," we take as a matter of course, but we miss other beauties which she has taught us to expect; we feel that she is not equal to herself; and it is a tribute to her well-attested powers if we dwell on what has disappointed us, rather than on what has gratified us. An easy, agreeable style of narrative, some noble sentiments expressed in the quiet, unexaggerated way that indicates their source to be a deep spring of conviction and experience, not a mere rain-torrent of hearsay enthusiasm, with here and there a trait of character or conduct painted with the truthfulness of close observation, are merits enough to raise a book far above the common run of circulating library fiction; but they are not enough to make a good novel, or one worthy of Miss Jewsbury's reputation. "Constance Herbert" is a Tendenz-roman; the characters and incidents are selected with a view to the enforcement of a principle. The general principle meant to be enforced is the unhesitating, uncompromising sacrifice of inclination to duty, and the special case to which this principle is applied in the novel, is the abstinence from marriage where there is an inheritance of insanity. So far, we have no difference of opinion with Miss Jewsbury. But the mode in which she enforces the principle, both theoretically in the Envoi and illustratively in the story of her novel, implies, we think, a false view of life, and virtually nullifies the very magnanimity she inculcates. "If," she says in the Envoi, "we have succeeded in articulating any principle in this book, it is to entreat our readers to have boldness to act up to the sternest requirements that duty claims as right. Although it may at the time seem to slay them, it will in the end prove life. Nothing they renounce for the sake of a higher principle, will prove to have been worth the keeping." The italics are ours, and we use them to indicate what we think false in Miss Jewsbury's moral. This moral is illustrated in the novel by the story of three ladies, who after renouncing their lovers, or being renounced by them, have the satisfaction of feeling in the end that these lovers were extremely "good-for-nothing," and that they (the ladies) have had an excellent riddance. In all this we can see neither the true doctrine of renunciation, nor a true representation of the realities of life; and we are sorry that a writer of Miss Jewsbury's insight and sincerity should have produced three volumes for the sake of teaching such copy-book morality. It is not the fact that what duty calls on us to renounce, will invariably prove "not worth the keeping;" and if it were the fact, renunciation would cease to be moral heroism, and would be simply a calculation of prudence. 

Let us take the special case which Miss Jewsbury has chosen as her illustration. It might equally happen that a woman in the position of Constance Herbert, who renounces marriage because she will not entail on others the family heritage of insanity, had fixed her affections, not on an egotistic, shallow worldling like Philip Marchmont, but on a man who was fitted to make the happiness of a woman's life, and whose subsequent career would only impress on her more and more deeply the extent of the sacrifice she had made in refusing him. And it is this very perception that the thing we renounce is precious, is something never to be compensated to us, which constitutes the beauty and heroism of renunciation. The only motive that renders such a resolution as Constance Herbert's noble, is that keen sympathy with human misery which makes a woman prefer to suffer for the term of her own life, rather than run the risk of causing misery to an indefinite number of other human beings; and a mind influenced by such a motive will find no support in the very questionable satisfaction of discovering that objects once cherished were in fact worthless. The notion that duty looks stern, but all the while has her hand full of sugar-plums, with which she will reward us by-and-by, is the favourite cant of optimists, who try to make out that this tangled wilderness of life has a plan as easy to trace as that of a Dutch garden; but it really undermines all true moral development by perpetually substituting something extrinsic as a motive to action, instead of the immediate impulse of love or justice, which alone makes an action truly moral. This is a grave question to enter on a propos of a novel; but Miss Jewsbury is so emphatic in the enunciation of her moral, that she forces us to consider her book rather in the light of a homily than of a fiction--to criticise her doctrine rather than her story. On another point, too, we must remonstrate with her a little, chiefly because we value her influence, and should like to see it always in what seems to us the right scale. With the exception of Mr. Harrop, who is simply a cipher awaiting a wife to give him any value, there is not a man in her book who is not either weak, perfidious, or rascally, while almost all the women are models of magnanimity and devotedness. The lions, i.e., the ladies, have got the brush in their hands with a vengeance now, and are retaliating for the calumnies of men from Adam downwards. Perhaps it is but fair to allow them a little exaggeration. Still we must meekly suggest that we cannot accept an ex parte statement, even from that paragon Aunt Margaret, as altogether decisive. Aunt Margaret tells us that in the bloom of youth and beauty, with virtues and accomplishments to correspond, she alienated her husband by pure devotion to him. "No man," she says, "can bear entire devotion." This reminds us of a certain toper, who after drinking a series of glasses of brandy-and-water one night, complained the next morning that the water did not agree with him. We are inclined to think that it is less frequently devotion which alienates men, than something infused in the devotion--a certain amount of silliness, or temper, or exigeance, for example, which, though given in small doses, will, if persevered in, have a strongly alterative effect. Men, in fact, are in rather a difficult position: in one ear a Miss Grace Lee, or some such strong-minded woman, thunders that they demand to be worshipped, and abhor a woman who has any self-dependence; on the other, a melancholy Viola complains that they never appreciate devotion, that they care only for a woman who treats them with indifference. A discouraging view of the case for both sexes! Seriously, we care too much for the attainment of a better understanding as to woman's true position, not to be sorry when a writer like Miss Jewsbury only adds her voice to swell the confusion on this subject.

The merits of "Thorney Hall"[3] are of the negative kind. It is not sentimental, not inflated, not religio-didactic: it has no pretension to be anything else than a story of ordinary life, with its inward and outward trials, its mistakes and misfortunes. But this one pretension it fails to make good; its scenes and characters are vague and shadowy; they neither remind us of our own experience nor make us believe in them as the experience of another. However, those who are looking out for a one-volumed novel, which will not disturb the initiation of the digestive process, and is likely, by-and-by, to lull them into their siesta, will find "Thorney Hall" unexceptionable for their purpose.

"Our World; or, the Democrat's Rule,"[4] is an American novel which will attract only those readers who can be induced to linger over scenes more painful than the most painful in "Uncle Tom's Cabin" by any slighter motive than a stern necessity for becoming acquainted with the facts of a special case. Compared with the perverted feeling shown in the choice of such subjects we can tolerate the milk-and-water triviality of "Married Women."[5] We suppose there is still a public for novels like this among the clients of the circulating libraries in provincial towns; and, after all, an interest in such feeble creations is better than blank ennui or indulgence in acrid gossip. After this home-made gooseberry, it is curious to taste the fine old crusted port (not without bee's wing) of Cervantes' "Exemplary Novels,"[6] which Mr. Bohn gives us in one of his extra volumes, or the "double stout" of De Foe's works,[7] of which a new volume, containing "Roxana," and the "Life and Adventures of Mrs. Christian Davies," has appeared in the same publisher's "British Classics." A propos of the "British Classics" (not a propos of novels), we may mention that another new issue of that series is the fourth volume of Addison's Works, edited by Bishop Hurd.[8]

Emile Souvestre is deservedly a favourite writer in England. The translation of his "Leaves from a Family Journal," which appeared last quarter, is now followed by a translation of "Tales and Sketches "[9] by him illustrative of scenery and manners in Brittany and La Vendee, published in that attractive series, Constable's Miscellany of Foreign Literature. The beautiful paper and type, and the convenient size of the volume, make these pleasant tales seem all the more readable--in happy contrast with the getting up of German books which you can only read in spite of the fact that they fall to pieces before you have turned over half-a-dozen pages.

The name of Matthew Arnold on a volume of Poems is a sufficient recommendation to the notice of all those who are careful to supply themselves with poetry of a new vintage, so we need not regret, except on our own account, that we have made rather a late acquaintance with his Second Series of Poems, published last quarter.[10] If we had written of these poems after reading them only once, we should have given them a tepid kind of praise, but after reading them again and again, we have become their partizan, and are tempted to be intolerant of those who will not admit their beauty. Our first impression from a poem of Mr. Arnold's--and with some persons this is the sole impression--generally is, that it is rather tame and prosaic. The thought is always refined and unhackneyed, sometimes new and sublime, but he seems not to have found the winged word which carries the thought at once to the mind of the reader; his poems do not come to us like original melodies, which are beautiful facts that one never thinks of altering any more than a pine-tree or a river; we are haunted by the feeling that he might have said the same thing much better. But when, simply for the sake of converse with a nature so gifted and cultivated as Mr. Arnold's, we linger over a poem which contains some deep and fresh thought, we begin to perceive poetic beauties--felicities of expression and description, which are too quiet and subdued to be seized at the first glance. You must become familiar with his poems before yon can appreciate them as poetry, just as in the early spring you must come very near to the woods before you can discern the delicate glossy or downy buds which distinguish their April from their winter clothing. He never attains the wonderful word-music of Tennyson, which lives with you like an Adelaide of Beethoven, or a Preghiera of Rossini; but his combinations and phrases are never common, they are fresh from the fountain, and call the reader's mind into new activity. Mr. Arnold's grand defect is a want of rhythm--we mean of that rhythm which is music to an English ear. His imitations of the classical metres can no more win a place in our lasting national poetry than orange and olive-trees can flourish in our common English gardens; and his persistence in these imitations is, we think, a proof that he lacks that fine sense of word-music, that direct inspiration of song, as distinguished from speech, which is the crowning gift of the poet.

This Second Series is not equal, though it is a worthy companion, to the first; there is no poem in it so fine as "Zohrah and Rustum," or "Tristan and Iseult;" but in putting the volume into the hands of a reader to whom Mr. Arnold's poems were new, we should point to "Resignation," and to "The Last Glen," and "Typho" in "The Harp-player on Etna," as favourable specimens of the author's power in two directions--the expression of exquisite sensibility united with deep thought, in which he reminds us of Wordsworth, and the revivifying of antique conceptions by freshly-felt descriptions of external nature and masterly indications of permanent human feeling, after the manner of Tennyson. We steal space for the sake of quoting two passages from "Resignation:"--

"The Poet, to whose mighty heart 
Heaven doth a quicker pulse impart, 
Subdues that energy to scan 
Not his own course, but that of Man. 

* * * * *

From some high station he looks down, 
At sunset, on a populous town; 
Surveys each happy group that fleets, 
Toil ended, through the shining streets, 
Each with some errand of his own;-- 
And does not say, I am alone. 
He sees the gentle stir of birth 
When Morning purifies the earth; 
He leans upon a gate and sees 
The pastures and the quiet trees. 
Low woody hill, with gracious bound, 
Folds the still valley almost round: 
The cuckoo, loud on some high lawn, 
Is answer'd from the depth of dawn; 
In the hedge straggling to the stream, 
Pale, dew-drench'd, half shut roses gleam; 
But where the further side slopes down 
He sees the drowsy new-wak'd clown 
In his white quaint embroider'd frock 
Make, whistling, towards his mist-wreathed flock; 
Slowly, behind the heavy tread 
The wet flower'd grass heaves up its head.-- 
Lean'd on his gate, he gazes: tears 
Are in his eyes, and in his ears 
The murmur of a thousand years: 
Before him he sees Life unroll, 
A placid and continuous whole: 
That general Life, which does not cease, 
Whose secret is not joy, but peace; 
That Life, whose dumb wish is not miss'd 
If birth proceeds, if things subsist: 
The Life of plants, and stones, and rain: 
The Life he craves; if not in vain 
Fate gave, what Chance shall not controul 
His sad lucidity of soul. 

* * * * *

"Enough, we live--and if a life 
With large results so little rife, 
Though bearable, seem hardly worth 
This pomp of worlds, this pain of birth; 
Yet, Fausta, the mute earth we tread, 
The solemn hills around us spread, 
This stream that falls incessantly,
The strange-scrawl'd rocks, the lonely sky,
If I might lend their life a voice,
Seem to bear rather than rejoice,
And even could the intemperate prayer
Man iterates, while these forbear,
For movement, for an ample sphere,
Pierce Fate's impenetrable ear;
Not milder is the general lot
Because our spirits have forgot,
In action's dizzying eddy whirl'd
The something that infects the world."

The transition from Matthew Arnold to Chaucer is not a startling one, for our modern school of poets are more obviously the lineal descendants of the Father of English Poetry than many poets who were nearer to him chronologically. We have been struck with special indications of this kinship in turning over the four volumes of Chaucer [11] which form the last issue of Mr. Robert Bell's excellent and attractive annotated edition of the English poets--excellent from the careful and agreeable manner in which the editor performs his labour of illustrating and commenting, and attractive from the clearness of the type and the comfortable pocket-size of the volumes. Poets, of all writers, should be given to us in a portable shape; we study them less at our desk than under the branching shade of a beech or a chesnut, or when we are resting in our easy chair from the fatigues of prosaic life, or still more prosaic learning; and in such circumstances we shudder at a double-columned royal octavo, or at an edition which scatters our favourite passages in majestic type through ten or twelve cumbrous volumes. Those who share our taste will find in Mr. Bell's edition of Chaucer precisely what they want. The editor, after much consideration, has wisely decided on leaving Chaucer's orthography intact, attempts at modernizing being impossible without injury to the metre, and without settling questions which the balance of opinion demands should be left open. Chaucer himself has left what may be construed into an appeal against any tampering with his English:--

"And for there is so great diversity 
In English, and in writing of our tongue, 
So I pray God that none miswrite thee 
Ne thee mismetre for defaut of tongue;" 

and this is at least a hint that with him, as with all true poets, the minutest details of language are as essential to his creation as the skin to the beauty of the human form. Mr. Bell promises to give, at the end of his final volume, a glossary which has been revised by the light of the latest researches into our mediaeval language and provincial dialects; and with this, added to the Introduction and Notes, the reader will find himself in possession of all necessary aids to the enjoyment of Chaucer. The notes are brief and really enlightening. Mr. Bell does not incessantly invite your eye to the bottom of the page in order to expatiate on something quite beside the question; but wherever you are conscious of fogginess, you find a reference to a note which detains you from the text only just so long as is necessary. We must except the case of words which, we suppose, will be contained in the glossary--an exception which is a considerable disadvantage to readers who can have only one volume at hand at a time, but which probably was inevitable. On the whole, the thoroughness with which this "Annotated Edition of the English Poets" is projected, and hitherto carried out, does honour to the publishers' taste and spirit, as well as to Mr. Bell's ability and conscientiousness.

The same skies that make our garden flowers flourish encourage the growth of weeds, and so a time that produces real poets has generally a large crop of versifiers, whom the Reviewer must resignedly expect as so much inevitable chickweed or dandelion which will spring up round the heliotropes and anemones. On laying down Matthew Arnold, for example, we had to take up Mr. A. M. Morgan, [12] who tells us on superfine paper and in neat type that

"a mighty citadel,
A throbbing nation's eagle eye
To focus half humanity
Hath evermore a nameless spell;"

and who has the audacity to inscribe "From the German of Goethe"--meaning, we suppose, Mignon's divine song, "So lasst mich scheinen bis ich werde,"--over stanzas like this:

"Farewell, my own dear mother earth,
Sweet children, farewell ye!
The breath of spring, the voice of mirth
Too soon shall charm not me."

Again, Mr. William Ball, [13] a "Lake Poet," makes "accessible to some inquiry" beyond the circle of private friends, a thick volume of verse, in which he boldly invokes the muse on such subjects as "Macaulay on William Penn" and "Exeter v. Gorham," and in a long poem called "The Transcript," turns into blank verse the doctrines of the Anti-State-Church Association in this style:--
"Law makes a priest the gospel that betrays; 
Schools may make clergy; Heaven makes ministers.

* * * * *

Tell not of Simony: who sells the gift 
May sell the living too: 'tis man made all, 
Throughout the cold dry clauses of the Act 
That settles and maintains a church by law." 

"Echoes of the War" [14] are unpretending rhymes, which seem to be the sincere response of a warm British heart to the tales of noble deeds, and nobly endured suffering, which have come to us from the Crimea. The poem on Inkermann is an easy, spirited ballad of the kind we wish our war poets had hit on more frequently, instead of the high-flown metaphysical strain. The war has called forth little poetry such as our sons may learn along with "Hohenlinden" and "The Burial of Sir John Moore."

Under the title of "Passing Thoughts," [15] Mr. James Douglas, of Cavers, prints what might have been a series of magazine articles on miscellaneous subjects. The "Passing Thoughts" on Goethe and Rousseau were certainly not worth arresting, but those on Italy show some largeness of view and some feeling for the beautiful.

"Once on a time," says a fabulist, "the cattle grazing on a large common, agreed to admit a good number of donkeys into their society. An old race-horse, indeed, neighed some objections, but they were overcome by a placid bullock trained to the harness, who suggested, that as donkeys were numerous and there was plenty of pasture on the common, it was but fair to let them have a bite and to put up with a little braying now and then. So the donkeys were treated in a friendly way, till one of them gave himself airs of importance, kicked up behind, offered to run races with the horses, and kept up such a loud and continuous braying, that he was unanimously voted a nuisance, and driven off the common with kicks and blows." 

We use this fable to intimate why we show less tolerance to Mr. C. W. Fullom than to many other utterly unqualified authors who come under our notice. An obscure writer who announces himself through a string of newspaper puffs, which insinuate that he has "taken the town by storm," and that "his career of fame continues unchecked,"--who has the audacity to call a book stuffed with vulgar anecdotes and vulgar errors, the mere froth and scum of historical reading, a "History of Woman," [16] and to prefix to it a preface, in which he says, with an air of grave patronage, that he has not chosen to "harass and perplex" the reader by a citation of authorities, but that, "should it be thought desirable, they can be given more fully in another edition"--such a writer becomes insufferable from the mere loudness of his braying. Mr. Fullom's mastery of language and style may be judged of from the following specimens. He tells us that "the four rivers of Moses now baffle identity;" that the "military success of a hero ignored his crimes;" that "three queens of England, though all of foreign extraction, accompanied their consorts to the battle-ground of the East;" and that Pericles, while he denied Aspasia his purse, "so entirely reciprocated her affection, that he never entered or quitted her house without saluting her." Perhaps in his next edition, when the public has become sufficiently accustomed to the brilliancy of Mr. Fullom's erudition to bear the additional blaze of his "authorities," he will tell us from what ancient author he gathers that knowledge of the precise amount of Aspasia's affection, which enables him to pronounce that a salute on entering and leaving her house was an exact equivalent. We shall also be glad to learn in what edition of Plato we shall find the "Symposiacs" to which Mr. Fullom refers on the sixth page of his first volume. The rich string of authorities that he could cite "an' if he would," may be inferred from the use he has made of the sources he does mention. He tells as a piece of veridical history the fable of Pope Joan, though Gibbon, of whom, as well as of Plato and Herodotus, he "talks familiarly, as maidens do of puppy dogs," might have told him better. Another of Mr. Fullom's "facts" by which he offers to aid us in ascertaining "the effect of the female character on human progress at particular periods," is the story of St. Ursula and her eleven thousand virgins. But these stories are highly relevant and appropriate, compared with the mass (we had almost written mess) of matter in these volumes, especially the second, where the writer hops through history from the days of Hypatia to those of Josephine, apparently without any other guide than the fact that his scraps of knowledge here and there give him stepping-stones through the immeasurable morass of his ignorance. At Josephine he stops, from exhaustion, he tells us, "not of the subject," but of his "limited space"--limited apparently from his having been so extravagant as to widen the spaces between his lines (in printers' phrase, "leading") in the last forty pages of his second volume. It is not worth while to detain our readers longer over such a book; it has been our duty to examine it precisely for the sake of saving them from wasting their time upon it, and indeed, to adopt the equivocal compliment paid by a newspaper critic to another of Mr. Fullom's productions, the "History of Woman" "offers a forcible instance of what has to be surmounted in the journey of life,"--by a devoted reviewer.

The most important work amongst the contributions of French literature on our table, is a volume which has obtained the prize of the French Academy. It is a study of Menander, [17] in which M. Guillaume Guizot very ably popularizes the labours of Meineke. Lessing's fable of the blind hen industriously scratching up the grain which the alert cock forthwith appropriates, retains its application to the laborious German scholar, and his facile interpreter the Frenchman. In M. Guizot's moderately sized volume of very easy reading, those who, like Goldsmith's professor, manage to eat, drink, and sleep well without the aid of Greek, may learn perhaps as much as they care to know about Menander, and may gather withal an intelligent conception of Greek Comedy, Ancient, Middle, and New. An appendix contains a translation of the Fragments--many of them were chips from a marble statue, others, like a finger or a piece of muscular neck, revealing the hand of the master. One very numerous class of fragments, amounting to between seven and eight hundred, are the [Greek: Monostichoi], or moral sentiments and aphorisms contained in a single verse or sentence, which we owe to the anthologies compiled by ancient grammarians (as we absurdly call the [Greek: grammatikoi], or literary men of Greece). Moliere, we are told, after the success of his Precieuses ridicules, said: "Je n'ai plus que faire d'etudier Plaute et Terence, ni d'eplucher les fragments de Menandre;" and in turning over these fragments one understands how they might give precious hints to a creative genius, for even to more passive and obtuse readers they are very suggestive. M. Guizot first presents a history of Menander's fame and works. Like so many other chefs-d'oeuvre, his comedies were far from attaining popularity at once; the mediocrities of his contemporary, Philemon, were generally preferred; and of a hundred and five comedies written by Menander, only eight carried off the prize. The devices of barren critics have always been the same: first, Menander was too young; then he was a plagiarist; then he held the pernicious doctrines of Epicurus; then his life was immoral. Everything was easier to prove than that he had written bad comedies. Menander avenged himself by asking Philemon: "Do you not sometimes blush when your comedies are preferred to mine?" and the next age avenged him by placing him at the head of all comic dramatists. The celebrated critic, Aristophanes, ranked him even next to Homer; his comedies were performed at private banquets as well as on the stage; and, four centuries after Menander's day, Plutarch, in an enthusiastic eulogy, said, that at such banquets they were equally acceptable to the graver judgment of the sober guests and the rather riotous spirits of the wine-bibbers. It was the critic Aristophanes, by the way, who applied to Menander the graceful compliment, which has since been so often borrowed, and paid to forgotten immortals: "O Menander! O Life! which of you has imitated the other?" Equally ardent admiration was given to Menander in Rome, and his comedies became the model for Roman imitators, or rather the quarry for Roman "adapters." Terence, whom Caesar intended to compliment by addressing him as dimidiate Menander, being, as every one knows, the arch-adapter, who made such pillage respectable. Many comedies of Menander survived the destructive bigotry of the Christians so late even as the middle of the twelfth century, when they were frequently cited by the Archbishop Eustathius, in his Commentary on the "Iliad" and "Odyssey." After that time, there is no reliable trace of their existence; and unless some happy accident should reveal at Mount Athos, or elsewhere, an entire manuscript of a comedy or comedies of Menander, our literary Cuviers are reduced to a merely imaginary reconstruction of the whole to which the disjecta membra poeta belonged.

M. Guizot next knits together the scattered threads of information concerning Menander's life and character--his early authorship (his first dramatic prize having been won when he was only twenty-one); his friendship with Epicurus and Theophrastus; his luxurious habits; his love of Glycera, the celebrated hetaira, whom he introduced into one of his comedies; his refusal to leave Athens for the sake of honours at the court of Ptolemy Lagus; and his accidental death by drowning, at the age of fifty-two, when he was bathing in the Piraeus, on the borders of which the Athenians erected his tomb, near to that of Euripides. According to Suidas, Menander was [Greek] --in plain English, he squinted; but the same writer is careful to add that he was [Greek], that is to say, he had no mental squint, which unhappily can coexist with the most symmetrical pair of eyes. We are amused to see the way in which M. Guizot expatiates on an anecdote told by Athenaeus. Menander, says the ancient gossip and gourmand, coming in one day, as great and small men will sometimes do, hipped and out of humour, Glycera offered him some warmed milk, which he refused because of the wrinkled skin which gathers on the surface of boiled milk; whereupon Glycera, like a sensible woman, said: "Blow, and take the milk under." On reading this anecdote, M. Guizot tells us, he is no longer astonished that Charlotte fascinated Werther while she was cutting bread and butter; before this, probably he had thought with Lord Jeffrey, that the author of Werther was "not a gentleman."

To understand the position and merit of Menander as a comic dramatist, it is necessary to know something of the development of Greek comedy from its embryonic condition in the Bacchic hymns; and accordingly M. Guizot considers in succession the subjects, plan, and characters of the Greek comedy in the ancient and middle period as well as in the new, to which Menander belonged. The ancient comedy, represented by Aristophanes, occupied itself almost entirely with political subjects: it was a dramatised criticism and satire of public men and public measures--the acted "Punch" or "Charivari" of Athens. The characters were either personifications in which there was the most daring combination of extravagant fancy with acutely portrayed reality, or outrageous caricatures of well-known individuals; personal attack was its essence; the public weal was the only thing it held sacred. After the Peloponnesian war, when Athens had lost its supremacy and the Athenians had exchanged the proud sense of self-government for a prosperous subordination, this form of comedy was no longer possible, and dramatic talent took for its object not public life, but life in public--the types of character and the habits which form the elements of social life, as distinguished from political and domestic life. The courtesan, the fishmonger (the beet noire of the Athenian market), the parasite, the drunkard, the foreign visitor at Athens, the peasant, were the favourite types of the middle comedy; and when it dealt with philosophers and literary men, the object was not, as in the ancient comedy, to impale them as pernicious to the commonwealth, but simply to hold up to laughter their fine-spun distinctions and the affectations of their style. The new comedy had much in common with the middle, but to the satire of vices and absurdities, to the acute perception and delineation of characteristics, Menander added the profound comprehension of character, the sense of beauty, and the pathos which are essential to high comedy; in fact, he was the Moliere of antiquity. But in Moliere, as well as in Menander, we find many of the specific features of the middle Greek comedy. Here, for example, is a passage from a comic dramatist of the middle period, which one might imagine to have been extracted from Moliere, if indeed it is not more like our English ridicule of Hegel. A father asks his son:--

"'What worthy employment do you speak of? Passing your days in the Lyceum with the sophists, a half-starved race who eat nothing but figs? And what do you talk about there?' --Son. 'That which becomes is not, for that which becomes cannot be while it is becoming; and if, to speak absolutely, that which becomes, was formerly, it was not at least what it becomes at this moment, for nothing can be without being, nor can become what it is already. But that which is not become, is not; and, in fact, how can that have become which has not become? For, in order to become, it is necessary first to be, and if the first state of being is wanting, how can being arise out of non-being? It is impossible. If, then, a thing, from being what it is, becomes something else, in future it will not be. But some one will say to me here:-- And non-being? If one day it becomes, what will it become? --Non-being will not become; for from the day in which it came, it would be, and non-being would not be itself.' 'Hold!' cries the father, 'Apollo himself could make nothing of such reasoning.'"

And here again is a passage, satirizing the rage for periphrasis, which might have come from the same mint as the Precieuses ridicules:--

"A. Shall I say--a mixture of the fair sweets of honey and the tears which flow from the teats of the bleating goats, placed on a large napkin of flour, chaste daughter of Ceres, and ornamented with a thousand delicate knick-knacks? or shall I say--a cake? --B. A cake; I like it better. --A. Will you take the drops perspired from the springs of Bacchus? --B. Abridge; say wine. --A. Or the moist dew of the fountain?" &c.

The fishmonger was the favourite butt of the middle comedy; nothing is too hyperbolical to convey an idea of his stupendous impudence and the profound cunning of the ruses by which he evaded the law:--

"Does the law forbid them to water their fish? --Yes; but no sooner does one of these shameless men see his fish getting dry, than he picks a quarrel on the spot; it soon comes to blows, and suddenly, making believe that he has received a mortal blow, he falls down amongst his fish as if stunned. 'Water! Water!' is the cry. A comrade seizes a bucket, scarcely sprinkles the pretended dying man, and inundates the fish, so that you would vow they had been fished the moment before!"

One of the novelties introduced into the comedy by Menander was the prominent position he gave to women; he was wise enough to see that they were necessary to any varied and romantic interest in his plays. Not that he is complimentary to women; on the contrary, a large proportion of his remaining fragments are rather sharp epigrams on women and marriage. But the very bitterness of the new comedy on these subjects is a proof how important woman had become, how erroneous the notion is, that the married woman in Greece was never anything more than a pampered slave. In the ancient comedy, and generally in the middle, the character of a wife is no theme for satire or invective; it was a matter of too much indifference. The husband could turn the key on her whenever he liked, and find the main objects of his life elsewhere. But clearly, in the period of Alexander's successors, which was the period of the new comedy, something very like hen-pecking was not foreign to the experience of Greek husbands. One feels especial interest in reading the pathetic fragments of Menander, several of which are expansions of his often-quoted passage: "Whom the gods love, die young." But we must allow ourselves no more quotations, and will only tell the reader that M. Guizot's two last chapters are occupied with the style of Menander, the strong influence of Euripides on his writings, and his various imitators, Greek and Roman.

"Tolla" [18] is a perfectly charming tale, by M. Edmund About, a young writer already known by an interesting book of travel in Greece. The incidents of this little story, which forms only a small volume of this "Bibliotheque des Chemins de Fer," are very simple, but they are made of absorbing interest, by the artistic mastery with which the writer transports us beneath the skies of Italy, and shows us the life of the modern Italian grandee, or the romantic barbarism still existing in the Italian peasant; by the living, unexaggerated reality of the characters; and by the pure and tender spirit which breathes through the whole narrative, and tempers the French point and vivacity of the style. Since George Sand's "Andre" we remember no picture of a character at once amiable, infirm, and selfish, superior to this of Lello, and the delicacy of the touches which indicate the love of the peasant Menico for his high-born mistress, is a kind of excellence which Sand has never attained. We hope and believe that "Tolla" is only the first of many beautiful stories for which we shall have to thank M. Edmund About: a bit of virgin gold like this tells of a rich mine yet to be worked. We turned with some expectation to another volume of the same series, containing some translations of Danish tales, thinking that we should perhaps find in them some fresh local colouring in so unhackneyed a region as Denmark. Frederika Bremer and Hans Christian Andersen, with all their faults, have given us an inclination for Scandinavian fiction. These "Nouvelles Danoises," however, are nothing more than love stories of the very flimsiest texture, impressing one simply with the strong family resemblance there is between poor writers of all nations. [19] In the same cheap form there is republished Theophile Gautier's little tale, "Militona," which opens with a fascinating picture of Spanish life, but falls off terribly towards the end. [20] How is it that novels and tales are so often like the baskets of strawberries which tempt the thirsty pedestrian at Kew or elsewhere on a bright summer's day--all inviting, ripe, and fresh at the beginning, and, as you near the end, poor, crude, and stale? Perhaps many reasons might be given for the declension, if this were a place for a dissertation on the subject; but at present we merely remark on the fact, as a hint to any reader who may have an unfinished novel on the anvil.

The supply of German literature this quarter is unusually meagre. "Werther und seine Zeit," [21] is a small volume which gives us, without the vehicle of irrelevant prolixity in which the contributions to Goethe-Literatur are generally presented, the whole bibliography of "Werther;" an account of the various translations and criticisms--in fact, the entire fortunes of the book from its first appearance up to Mr. Bohn's edition of it in the "Standard Library;" and also some new details concerning Goethe's Wetzlar acquaintances, which will be interesting to the few readers who make Goethe-literature a special study. We cannot equally recommend Herr Hartung's "Ungelehrte Erklarung des Goethe'schen Faust:" [22] he makes the common mistake of being too scanty in real illustration and too diffuse in paraphrase.

If there are any readers of Gowdie-Castle and St. Roche who are curious for information about the authoress, Frau Paalzow, they will find it in a small volume entitled "Ein Schriftsteller-Leben," [23] which contains a short sketch of her life and a collection of her letters, chiefly occupied with her little anxieties and satisfactions as an authoress. A selection of original novels, under the title of the Deutsche Bibliothek, has now reached the sixth volume, which closes the first series. Among the writers engaged, perhaps the best known in England are Leopold Schefer and Theodore Mugge, the latter of whom contributed the first volume--"Afraja," a story of Lapland life, which excited much attention from its freshness, and has been translated into English. The fifth and sixth volumes contain "Die Freimaurer" and "Die Familie Ammer." Each novel of the series is complete in one volume, of unusually good paper, type, and binding for a German publication, thick and closely printed withal, so that the lovers of long romances, who like to feel that they have before them hour after hour of quiet trotting in a pony-chaise, rather than the brain-congesting hurry of a railway journey, will find the Deutsche Bibliothek to their taste in this respect. "We no longer travel, we arrive at places," says Thackeray, regretting the incident and variety of the old-fashioned journey; and perhaps there is the same sort of disadvantage in short tales, which are always bringing one to the shock or the terminus of a denouement.

ART.

AT this moment when the French and English schools of painting have arranged themselves within the walls of the Paris Exhibition side by side, with as cordial a recognition of each other's peculiar excellences, and with as generous an emulation as animates the French and English armies in the Crimea; and when we find how great an attraction to the sight-seeing London public the little annual exhibition of French pictures in Pall Mall has become, we cannot but believe that books calculated to enlighten the English upon the spirit and aims which have animated, and still animate the chief masters of the French school of painting, will meet with a numerous class of readers. This memoir of "David,"[1] with its accompanying notices of his school and most distinguished scholars, is a work especially calculated to interest the English student of French Art; and in fact, we believe, to interest many readers of a more general class. Louis David, born in 1748, and dying in 1825, a man of a peculiar and singularly active genius in Art, and who identified himself with the social and political life of his country throughout the most important portion of these seventy-seven years, must furnish materials for one of the strangest and most striking biographies ever penned. The bold man who has undertaken the delicate and difficult task of toiling in this rich field of biographical material, and that too with a strong enthusiastic love of his work, is one well calculated for the labour. M. Delecluze from his earliest youth has cherished a deep respect and affection for Louis David, having been a favourite pupil of the celebrated painter, and through many long years of strange vicissitude, his confidential friend and frequent companion. Not the least interesting portion of this work consists in the biographer's personal recollections of scenes and characters connected with his hero, and which, with much care and artistic skill, are interwoven with the narrative. The child-like awe with which M. Delecluze, when a lad, listened to the expressions of conflicting admiration and detestation which David's dual character of painter and associate of Robespierre in the reign of blood, elicited; his two remarkable glimpses of David upon public occasions, now marshalling the cortege at the famous Fete de l'Etre Supreme, and following in the footsteps of Robespierre; now, after the fall of that monster in human form, defending himself at the Tribune with hesitating, hoarse speech, and with sweat dropping from his garments to the ground; and later on the youth's trembling, breathless delight, when as a tyro in Art, he was conducted into the renowned studio of the ex-associate of Robespierre--all form an impressive vestibule by which we approach the cenotaph raised by M. Delecluze to his renowned instructor and friend. We will extract a short passage from M. Delecluze's preface, to give our readers an idea of the impartial spirit in which it has been the writer's endeavour to perform his difficult task.

"The productions of art, as well as those of literature, always are in sympathy with the events of the artist's or author's life, always are a reflex from the errors and the prejudices of the epoch through which he has passed. More than usually has this been the case with David, who always yielded to the influence exercised by the different governments under which he lived, from the last years of the monarchy, until the return of the Bourbons to France in 1815. Without doubt, it is to be regretted that the man should have shown himself so feeble and so versatile; but it is at once curious and instructive to observe with what promptitude, and with what fidelity, the diverse and often contrary impressions which the artist received, have been reproduced in the works which he has successively achieved under Louis XIV, during the Reign of Terror under the Consulate and during the reign of Napoleon. David's genius may be compared to a mirror; for it has with the same fidelity, and with the same impassibility, reproduced without choice and involuntarily, every shade of the political and intellectual revolution through which the artist has passed."

Our space unfortunately precludes us from following with as much nicety as we feel inclined to bestow upon the subject, the singular psychological as well as artistic study which these remarkable memoirs afford. We recommend them, however, as well worthy of perusal by our readers, giving them only here a few scattered extracts from the volume which is so rich in curious glimpses of French artistic and social life.

Passing over the blood-stained epoch of David's association with Robespierre; over David's imprisonment in the Luxembourg, where his wife, who had quitted him through horror of his revolutionary opinions, rejoined him in his hour of deserved unpopularity, when he awoke from his sad and frightful political dreams; over the execution and completion of one of his most important works, the "Sabines," we find this "versatile" painter fascinated by the genius and classic beauty of young General Bonaparte, and breaking forth into raptures such as the following, to his scholars:--"Ah, my friends! he is a man to whom altars would have been erected in antiquity; yes, my friends, yes, my dear friends! Bonaparte is my hero!" And this justice we must do to the memory of as impulsive and "versatile" a human being as ever existed--that through good and through evil report David remained faithful to his new hero, being in 1816 condemned to banishment as a stanch opposer of the Bourbons, and a sincere Bonapartist.

Bonaparte always evinced much goodwill towards David, either from a sincere admiration of the painter's merit, or through a prophetic instinct which made him divine how he might employ for his own benefit the genius of the artist.

At that epoch when Bonaparte's power and popularity were established after the battle of Marengo, and when he returned to Paris, he seems first seriously to have thought of having his portrait painted by David. We will extract from M. Delecluze's volume the following conversation which took place between the first consul and the painter, as it is characteristic, and has reference to that well-known picture, which by engravings has become familiar to every child throughout Europe--"Napoleon crossing the Alps."

"What are you about, now?" demanded the First Consul.
"I am at work upon my Passage of Thermopylae"
"All the worse. You are in the wrong, David, to fatigue yourself with painting the vanquished." "But, Citizen Consul, these vanquished are so many heroes who die for their country, and spite of their defeat, who have repulsed the Persians from Greece during more than a hundred years."
"No matter," replied Bonaparte; "the name alone of Leonidas has come down to us. All the rest is lost for history."
"All?" interrupted David--"All except the noble resistance to an innumerable army. All! except their devotion, to which their name could add nothing. All! except their customs, their austere Lacedemonian manners which it is useful to recall to the memories of our soldiers!"

It was now that the First Consul expressed his desire that David should paint his portrait. The painter having long wished to occupy himself upon such a work, accepted the proposal with marked gratification, and immediately prayed Bonaparte to fix on which day he would sit to him.

"Sit!" exclaimed Bonaparte, who had already shown how disagreeable that kind of restraint was to him, "of what good is that! Do you believe that the great men of antiquity, whose images we possess, ever 'sate'?"
"But I am painting you for your age, for the men who have seen you, who know you; they would wish to find the picture resembling you."
"Resembling!--it is not the exactness of the features, not any little peculiarity of the nose," returned the First Consul, "which makes a portrait like the original. It is the character of the physiognomy which it is necessary to paint"
"One thing does not prevent the other," remarked the painter.
"Certainly Alexander never sate to Apelles," observed Bonaparte. "No one inquires whether the portraits of great men resemble them. It is sufficient that their genius animates their portraits."
"You teach me the art of painting," said David, after this observation.
"You are joking. How?"
"I never before regarded painting under this aspect. You are right, Citizen First Consul. Well, you shall not sit. Leave me to myself. I will paint you without your sitting."

Bonaparte having several times found occasion to observe to David that if he painted him, he should wish to be represented calm upon a wild horse, David combined this idea with Napoleon's crossing the Alps, and originated this celebrated equestrian picture.

David having departed for Bruxelles, the abode of his exile, a vast revolution effected itself almost instantaneously in the art of France; the romantic succeeded to the classic element. The reaction in favour of the romantic, so called, was as violent as the tenets of the classic school had been tyrannic. The war waged was furious in the extreme; and the growing sympathy of the public and of the rising artists for English and German influence, appears to have been a cloud over the last years of David, the great pillar of the classic school of French art. Personally, however, the old artist had no mortification to experience in his banishment, for a body of young Belgian artists gathered around him, and he received homage on all hands, until his earthly remains were interred in January, 1826, with all but princely pomp in the church of St. Gudule, at Bruxelles.

As it is natural to suppose, the strongest sympathies of M. Delecluze are for the school of his hero and friend David; and we of a younger generation are inclined to accuse him of some considerable injustice towards the admirers of Delaroche and Scheffer. But we must refer our readers to the volume itself for M. Delecluze's opinions upon this art-war, and also for what forms one of the most interesting and important portions of his work,--the critical and biographical sketches of David's scholars, amongst the most distinguished of whom we may mention Drouais, Girodet, Gerard, Gros, Ingres, Schnetz, Leopold Robert, and Granet.

Mr. Stirling informs us in his preface, [2] that the little work before us is an amplification of the memoir of Velazquez, contained in the "Annals of the Artists in Spain," a work which has long made Mr. Stirling's name familiar to the readers of art-literature. Mr. Stirling's reputation as a Spanish scholar is so well-established, and his writings have been so favourably received by the public, that the reader runs small risk of disappointment when he opens a fresh contribution by this author to our English works on Spanish literature.

In order to introduce Velazquez with the dignity befitting so distinguished a man, his modern biographer, who, by the by, draws the materials of his book exclusively from Spanish authorities, and treats with just contempt various unsatisfactory French memoirs of Velazquez which have appeared of late years, opens his little work with a concise sketch of the history of Spanish art, until the time of Velazquez. He informs his readers that painting in Spain is an art of slow and late growth; in fact, that it had not fully taken root in Spanish soil above a hundred and fifty years before its most original genius arose in the person of Velazquez. Here and there a monarch, or a wealthy grandee, adorned his palace with solemn paintings, in a singular hard and dry style, and all of a gloomy, devotional character, or bestowed similar sacred pictures upon chapels and convents. But there was no living national love of art. In fact, it appears to have been a difficult matter for a Spanish monarch or noble to find native artists to be employed by him; and in more than one instance artists had to be sought for abroad. The church, it is true, much as she, on the one hand, cramped by her bigotry and her Inquisition whatever artistic vigour might germinate in the land, nevertheless, on the other hand, by enlisting architects and painters in her service, became the great protectress of art in Spain, as well as in Italy.

The spirit of the age, however, being unbounded faith in miracles and in saintly personages, and the Inquisition asserting dominion over Art as well as over belief, it required the advent of some unusually daring man and highly endowed painter to release painting from the thraldom of the Church. This bold regenerator of Spanish Art arrived in the person of Diego Rodriguez de Silva y Velazquez, who was born in Seville, in the year 1599, the same year in which Vandyke was born at Antwerp. This Diego Rodriguez came of gentle blood; his father, Juan Rodriguez de Silva, being descended from the great Portuguese house which traced its pedigree up to the Kings of Alba Longa; and his mother, Geronima Velazquez--'by whose name, according to the frequent usage of Andalusia, her son came to be known'--being of a noble family of Seville. These parents, though of noble descent, appear not to have been wealthy, the father following the legal profession. No care seems, however, to have been spared by them upon the nurture and education of the future painter; Geronima especially instilling into his mind the principles of virtue and "the milk of the fear of God." In all knightly exercises, as well as in scholastic education, young Diego made rapid progress; but his strong predilection for Art evincing itself by many drawings upon grammars and copy-books, his parents wisely agreed that he should choose painting as a profession. He was placed with Francisco Herrera the elder, a painter then much in vogue, and who was the first to cast off the timid, dry style of the earlier school. From him young Velazquez acquired a boldness and vigour of handling which he employed in after days with a vast success never dreamt of by his old master. Herrera's vigour exhibited itself not only in the laying on of his colours with brushes of unusual length, but also in the treatment of his scholars, who often fled from his vigorous corporeal chastisements. And amidst these fugitives was Velasquez, who took refuge in a more pacific school--that of Francisco Hacheco, a man learned in Art rather than a painter. Here Velazquez soon discovered that nature herself is the artist's best teacher, and industry his surest guide to perfection. He therefore flung himself free from all fetters of "schools," seeking by every means to study from nature alone. This must have been the most truly noble and energetic portion of Velazquez's career. As yet, his efforts, uncrowned by public recognition of his genius; still with the fire of genius burning within him, and its delicious consciousness of power stimulating him to unwearying assiduity, he studied the human form with a boldness as yet unexampled in Spain. Animals, landscape, still-life--and especially subjects of low-life, which "abound in such rich and picturesque abundance in the streets and waysides of Andalusia"--he painted with an unrivalled success, bringing to bear upon his pictures of common street-life a sense of humour akin to that of Cervantes. Pity only is it that this humour should, even then and later, upon certain occasions, have approached to the disgusting and unclean in strange contrast to the dignity and solemnity of the hidalgos and noble dames immortalized by the same pencil. It is a pleasant feature, not alone in this portion of the life of Velazquez, but in fact throughout his career, to observe old Pacheco rejoicing with unfeigned delight over the astounding success of his pupil, utterly devoid of any shadow of professional jealousy, giving him his daughter in marriage, introducing him to the eloquent-minded Duke of Alcale, procuring indirectly his reception to Madrid by the monarch himself, and finally, having assisted in, and gloried over, his proud triumphs, writing his life. Having become court-painter to that indolent, stolid, luxurious, art-loving, drama-protecting, loose-lived Philip IV, the career of Velazquez flowed on calmly enough amidst courtly pomps and artistic triumphs, varied by an occasional visit to Italy, or by the arrival at Madrid of some extraordinary visitors, such as Charles Prince of Wales upon his memorable wooing expedition, or of Rubens, that magnificent painter-ambassador. Mr. Stirling does not profess to give us the inner life of this celebrated Spaniard, whose biography he writes; and probably no data for such memorials could be found. We do not learn here how Velazquez felt or reasoned, or what were his theories respecting Art; we know little of the man's mind except by his works; but we catch through Mr. Stirling's descriptions many pleasant glimpses of his dignified and gravely, but magnificently attired figure, mingling in court pageants, or receiving crowned and coroneted heads within the sacred precincts of his studio. The especial charm of Mr. Stirling's little volume consists in the peculiarly picturesque manner in which he livingly brings before the mind of his reader the important historic personages with whom the path of Velazquez was united. Poets and ecclesiastics, ladies, warriors, statesmen, and dramatists surround and follow Philip to the bull-fights of Madrid, or to the silvan solitudes of Aranjuez; the Count-Duke Olivares intrigues and revels, ruining himself and Spain; there are "wars, and rumours of war;" and ever amidst these stirring scenes, as the grand central figure, we perceive Velazquez.

Upon the return of Velazquez from an artistic mission in Italy, in 1651, the King, as an especial mark of favour, conferred upon him the office of aposentador mayor, or quarter-master-general of the royal household, an office of great dignity and much emolument.

The fatigues of courtly etiquette and the solemn duties of aposentador mayor weighed in course of years heavier by far upon the body and soul of Velazquez, than either age or the labours of his artistic career. We can hear with a certain patience of this richly-endowed artist devoting the best years of his life to the painting of royal countenances and the splendours of a solemnly magnificent court, which was at once bigoted and licentious, because through these works of Velazquez's pencil we receive the most valuable historical commentary. But when we read of the duties of this high aposentador mayor being, amidst countless others, of a scarcely more important, but not less tedious, character, than the providing of lodgings for the king and his train in all progresses; the placing of his majesty's chair, and removal of the cloth when the king dined in public; the issuing of keys to new chamberlains, and the setting of chairs for cardinals and viceroys who came "to kiss hands," it is difficult to say which feeling becomes most dominant in one's mind, disgust at the stupid blindness of a king who, professing to appreciate Art and Spain's greatest painter, devoured this painter's life with ceaseless calls upon him for personal attendance on daily occasions of senseless, solemn etiquette; or regret that Velazquez should so weakly and complacently have yielded to this slavery of pomp. It was in 1651 that Philip IV bestowed this crowning dignity upon Velazquez; and, as the reader may readily imagine, we find henceforth, until the painter's death in 1660, in Mr. Stirling's pages more chronicles of court pageants than of pictures painted. True it is, that Velazquez was much employed during this period in arranging the Royal Galleries, as well as in attending to his withdrawal of the king's table-cloth "and issuing of keys to new chamberlains." In 1656 he, however, produced his last, and what by many connoisseurs has been pronounced his "masterpiece," a large picture known as the "Maids of Honour." The painter has represented himself as at work upon a picture of the royal family, who are waited upon by stately old-fashioned maids of honour in farthingales and ponderous adornments; and where the dwarfs, Maria Barbolo and Nicholas Pertusane, display their hideousness. "Velazquez," says Stirling, "seems in this picture to have anticipated the discovery of Daguerre, and, taking a real room and real chance-grouped people, to have fixed them as it were by magic, for all time on his canvas." The painter has represented himself as contemplating this picture upon the easel with his palette and brushes in his hand, and "wears at his girdle the omnipotent key of his office, and on his breast the red cross of Santiago." It is said that Philip IV., who came every day with the queen to see the picture, remarked when it was finished, that one thing was yet wanting; and, taking up a brush, painted the knightly insignia with his own royal fingers, thus conferring the accolade with a weapon not recognized in chivalry." It would have been well for Velazquez, and better for posterity, had the remainder of his life been employed in such calm, courtly homage as the painting of "maids of honour and royal personages," or even in such artistic matters as the arranging and cataloguing of the pictures in the Escurial. But his august master required the services of his indefatigable aposentador.

A solemn festive meeting of the two courts of France and Spain, to celebrate peace and the nuptials of Louis XIV and the Infanta Maria Teresa, having been arranged to take place in the summer of 1660 in the Isle of Pheasants, in the river of Bidasoa, Velazquez was despatched in March of that year to superintend the erection of a magnificent pavilion upon this islet, which, as neutral ground, has witnessed so many strange events connected with the annals of France and Spain. But not alone had the renowned aposentador to superintend the building of this pavilion; but he had to prepare the Castle of Fuenterrabia for the reception of his royal master, and to provide lodging for the royal train all the way from Madrid to the Bidasoa; and this gorgeous train travelled with oriental numbers and magnificence. When we read that "the baggage of the royal bride would alone have served for a small army;" that "beside personal equipments she carried a vast provision of presents, amongst which were two chests filled with purses, amber gloves, and whisker cases for her future brother-in-law, the Duke of Orleans;" that "the grandees of the household vied with each other in the size and splendour of their retinues;" that "the cavalcade extended six leagues in length, so that the trumpets of the van were sounding at the gate of the Alcala de Henares, the first day's halting-place, as the last files had issued from the gates of Madrid;" and that "the whole journey through Burgos and Vittoria was a triumph and a revel," one can form some faint idea of what harry, excitement, and fatigue must have overwhelmed the old painter, accustomed even as he had been throughout his life to court etiquette and pompous festivities. Add to which, Velazquez had to await the King's arrival at San Sebastian for two months, superintending his preparations for the reception of the royalties; to be in attendance upon Philip when he did arrive at San Sebastian; and during the three weeks of his stay there, pending the final negotiations, and "when his majesty's table was sometimes nearly overturned by the throngs of French who came to see him dine;" that he attended Philip to Fuenterrabia and was actively employed by his office throughout the week of pomp which the two courts passed on the frontiers of the two kingdoms.

These grand and glorious festivities terminated his career. Though apparently in his usual health during the excitement of his fatiguing avocations, "a report of his death," says Stirling, "preceded him to Madrid, and he found them bewailing his untimely end; but the tongue of rumour had spoken in the spirit of prophecy; his worldly work was done; and fate forbade the pageants of the Pheasants' Isle to be recorded by his inimitable pencil." On the 31st of July, the feast of Saint Ignatius Loyola, Velasquez was seized, on retiring to his apartments after attendance upon his majesty, with feverish symptoms, which greatly alarmed his physicians. After receiving every possible attention, he expired in the afternoon of August 6th, 1660. After lying in state, the body was conveyed with almost royal pomp at night to the parish-church of San Juan. Eight days later expired the wife of Velazquez, Juana Pacheco, the daughter of Velazquez' old master and his first biographer. The husband and wife repose in one grave.

" I am often asked by my friends," says Mr. Ruskin, in his preface to the little pamphlet before us, [3] "to mark for them the pictures in the Exhibitions of the year which appear to me the most interesting in their good qualities or their failure. I have determined, at last, to place the circular letters which on such occasions I am obliged to write, within the reach of the general public. Twenty years of severe labour, devoted exclusively to the study of the principles of art, have given me the right to speak on the subject with a measure of confidence; but it will be found that in the following pages few statements are made on my own authority, and that I have limited myself to pointing out simple facts with respect to each picture, leaving to the reader the power of verifying such statements for himself. No criticism is of any value which does not enable the spectator, in his own person, to understand, or to detect, the alleged merit or unworthiness of the picture; and the true work of a critic is not to make his hearer believe him, but to agree with him."

This is a healthy spirit in which to approach the criticism of contemporary works; and were it the usual tone of our art-critiques, we believe that however our artists might for the first moment wince beneath such unhesitating truth-speaking, as it has been their lot, especially this spring, to hear from Mr. Ruskin, they would have the nobility to profit by it. It is truly a bold and most responsible task which the author of "Modern Painters" has taken upon himself--that of public and self-appointed judge of the Royal Academy Exhibition, dealing around him death and damnation, unregardful of Royal Academicianship or Presidentship. One cannot but admire the courage of his action, believing that Mr. Ruskin is animated by the most conscientious love of perfection in art. Still our conviction is that he would much more speedily, and far more gracefully, achieve his object, were he to write "rather in sorrow than in anger."

Mr. Bohn has added, in the "Synopsis of the Principal Painters of the Dutch and Flemish Schools," a useful book of reference for students in art. [4] But its synoptical character naturally places it in the category of useful, rather than elegant or especially interesting, books. It will fill a valuable place on the shelf in the library of the art-amateur.

"The Invalid Painter." Herr von Schadow [5] has given much too ambitious a title* to the lucubrations and recollections of the "blind old man in the easy chair," wherefore his book is disappointing, notwithstanding some interesting biographical matter which it contains. Introduced into and loosely held together by a "novelle" of slightest construction, the ancient Herr Professor of Painting (who smokes a most meditative pipe upon the frontispiece) and ex-Director of the Dusseldorf Academy, gives us the benefit of his (sometimes very shadowy) thoughts and reflections upon art in general and modem art in particular, set forth in prose, in verse, and in allegorical scenes and pieces, and interspersed with "characteristics "and personal recollections of contemporary artists: Canova, Gottfried Schadow (the author's father, we suppose, sculptor of the "Victoria "over the Brandenburg gate, at Berlin, which Napoleon carried away to Paris, and which Blucher fetched back), Thorwaldsen, Cornelius, Overbeck, and Rauch. And there are notices of two artists whom the author did not personally know--Carstens and Flaxman--who are introduced as "poetical artists," both animated by a similar spirit, in unfavouring times, and both immortalized more by their designs than by executed works. Carstens was born in Schleswig, in 1754; Flaxman at York, in 1755; possibly they may have known each other, as they seem both to have resided at Rome at the same time. It was at Rome also where the author saw much of Thorwaldsen, of whom he tells some curious traits; of his avarice and liberality, his industry and idleness, his dark misanthropy and bright quickly-productive creativeness. We learn amongst other things that, though perfectly perspicuous in his ideas, he was most confused in their utterance, being in fact without a language. He had forgot his native Islandic or Danish, without acquiring the regular use of any other language: "He knew how to say everything in Italian, but said it all wrongly; and he used the German idiom in the same manner." It was only with his chisel that he could speak a perfect and harmonious language. Our author laments much Thorwaldsen's incapacity to appreciate the "Christian spirit;" a topic upon which he himself frequently and largely dwells. If we remember rightly, our author early in life joined the Roman-Catholic church, so overflowing was he with what he calls the "Christian element;" and though his Catholicism seems of that pseudo-philosophic Herr von Radowitz school, it is not pleasant to listen to his cloudy, religious-artistical talk. The book is cleverly illustrated with portraits and vignettes by Julius Hubner.

There seems a fatality connected with the National Gallery. [6] The purchase of bad pictures, the rejection of good ones; spurious ones purchased as true, and true ones rejected as spurious; master-pieces refused at remarkably small sums, and afterwards eagerly snatched at, at very large ones, and the wholesale damage of the finest paintings in the Gallery by injudicious cleanings, are the perpetually recurring proofs of the mismanagement of this important national property by those into whose hands it has been committed by government. This pamphlet, the title of which we have given, is a scarifying exposure of these lamentable proceedings; and, what is more, of the strange report made by the Committee appointed to inquire into them, in the very face of the most overwhelming evidence given before it. The protestors include five artists examined by the Committee, Walter Savage Landor, Thomas Wakley, and other public-spirited gentlemen. The facts brought forward, both from the Blue Book produced by this Committee, and other public sources, are astounding, and ought to be perused by every one anxious for the bettor management of our public institutions and for the better preservation of our national treasures of art.

It appears that the witnesses selected by the Committee as competent to judge of the effect of Mr. Seguier's cleaning on Claude's "Queen of Sheba" were thirty in number. Of these, twenty-two condemned it. Those examined regarding the same operation on Claude's "Marriage of Isaac and Rebecca," were twenty-three, and eighteen condemned it. On Claude's "Annunciation" there were again twenty-three and eighteen who condemned. On the cleaning of Canaletto's "View in Venice," twenty-two and seventeen who condemned it. On Canaletto's "Views on the Grand Canal," there were twenty-two examined, and fourteen of them condemned it; and the same proportion was maintained through the whole series of the pictures which had been cleaned; thus by a most decided majority recording the most indignant and unqualified condemnation of the whole process. The language used by such men as Sir David Brewster, Mr. Roberts, and by the principal artist witnesses, is that of "frightful alteration," "a destroyed picture," "damage irreparable," "pictures that can never recover," &c. Sir David Brewster declared that "neither time nor any discoloration of varnish will ever restore the 'Queen of Sheba,'" and that "the sea now more resembled a wall." The very umpires declared that the pictures are now "raw, crude, disagreeable to the eye, spotty, and rotten;" that their surfaces, and even the body colour, have been "rubbed and scrubbed off by over-cleaning."

The parties who did not condemn the barbarous work were Sir Charles Eastlake, the President of the Royal Academy, Mr. Uwins, the Keeper of the National Gallery, the picture cleaner, and, in short, the very parties implicated. Yet even these were compelled to confess, in contradiction to themselves, that much injury had been done. With all this before them, the Committee drew up an exculpatory report! It is the mystery of jobbery and secret influence against which this powerful protest is issued.

The opinions uttered by Sir Charles Eastlake and Mr. Uwins before the Committee are such as make us tremble at the idea of our National Gallery being in their hands and at their mercy. Though the object of the "scouring" which these gentlemen recommended was to bring out the beauty of these pictures by freeing them from dust, Sir Charles Eastlake, on the rawness being complained of that the cleaning had produced in the "Annunciation" and in the "Sheba," actually stated that the "Annunciation" would be much improved if you were "to take a little dust and rub on it, as that would do great good, much greater good than attempting to restore the softness of outline which may have been destroyed," and he actually "recommended that it should be left for at least a twelvemonth, so that it might have the benefit of dirt!" If dirt was so desirable, why then have run such fearful hazards to remove it?

Mr. Uwins also, on its being complained that the perspective of the water had been injured on Canaletto's "View on the Grand Canal," said: "now really Canaletto's mode of painting water was so absurd that if it were all rubbed out it would be so much the better!"

Canaletto's mode of painting may be absurd, but it is Canaletto's, and to admit Mr. Uwins's doctrine that we are at liberty to alter and improve the works of celebrated painters, is just to destroy the integrity, individuality, and value, of all works of art whatsoever. These are certainly singular, and more than singular,--alarming opinions, to be promulgated before a committee of the House of Commons by the two appointed guardians of the treasures of the National Gallery.

The protest extends its criticisms to the past, present, and future management of the Gallery, and deserves, both from the facts brought forward and the importance of the interests concerned, a careful and general perusal.

NOTES

BELLES LETTRES

[1] "Westward Ho! or, The Voyages and Adventures of Sir Amyas Leigh, Knight, of Bur-rough, in the County of Devon, in the Reign of Her Most Glorious Majesty Queen Elizabeth." Rendered into Modern English by Charles Kingsley. Cambridge: Macmillan and Co. 1885.
[2] "Constance Herbert." By Geraldine E. Jewsbury. London: Hurst and Blackett.
[3] "Thorney Hall: a Story of an Old Family." By Holme Lee, Author of "Maude Talbot." London: Smith and Elder.
[4] "Our World; or, the Democrat's Rule." By Justia, a Knownothing. London: Sampson Low.
[5] "Married Women." By the Author of "Broomhill; or, the County Beauties." London: Newby.
[6] "Cervantes' Exemplary Novels." London: Bohn.
[7] "De Foe's Works." Vol. IV. Bohn's British Classics. 
[8] "Addison's Works." Vol. IV. Bohn's British Classics.
[9] "Brittany and La Vendee. Tales and Sketches. With a Notice of the Life and Literary Character of Emile Souvestre." Edinburgh: Constable and Co.
[10] "Poems." By Matthew Arnold. Second Series. London: Longmans.
[11] "Poetical Works of Geoffrey Chaucer." Edited by Robert Bell. Vols. i. ii. iii. and iv. London: J. W. Parker and Son.
[12] "Poems." By Arthur H. Morgan. London: Saunders and Otley.
[13] "The Transcript, and other Poems." By William Ball. London: W. and F. G. Cash.
[14] "Echoes of the War, and other Poems." By Henry Sewell Stokes. Author of the "Vale of Lanherne." London: Longmans.
[15] "Passing Thoughts." By James Douglas, of Cavers. Edinburgh: Constable and Co.
[16] "The History of Woman, and Her Connexion with Religion, Civilization, and Domestic Manners, from the Earliest Periods." By C. W. Fullom. London: Longmans.
[17] "Menandre. Etude Historique et Litteraire sur la Comedie et la Societe; Grecques." Par M. Guillaume Guizot. Paris: Didier.
[18] "Tolla." Par Edmond About. Paris: Hachette et Cie.
[19] "Nouvelles Danoises. Traduites par Xavier Marmier." Paris: Hachette et Cie.
[20] "Militona." Par Theophile Gautier. Paris: Hachette et Cie.
[21] "Werther und Seine Zeit. Zur Goethe-Literatur." Von J. W. Appell. Leipzig: Engelmann.
[22] "Ungelehrte Erklarung des Goethe'schen Faust." Von J. A Hartung. Leipzig: Engelmann.
[23] "Ein Schriftsteller Leben." Breslau: Max und Comp.


ART

[1] "Louis David; son Ecole et son Temps. Souvenir." Par M. E. J. Delecluze. Paris: Didier. 1855.
[2] "Velazquez and his Works." By William Stirling. London: J. W. Parker and Son.
[3] "Notes on some of the Principal Pictures Exhibited in the Rooms of the Royal Academy, 1S65." By the Author of "Modern Painters." London: Smith, Elder, and Co.
[4] "A Classified Synopsis of the Principal Painters of the Dutch and Flemish Schools; including an Account of some of the Early German Masters connected with those of Flanders and Holland." By George Stanley. London: Bohn.
[5] "Der Moderne Vasari. Erinnerungen aus dem Kunstlerleben." Novelle von Dr. Wilhelm von Schadow. Berlin: Hertz. 1854.
[6] "Protest and Counter-Statement against the Report from the Select Committee on the National Gallery," ordered by the House of Commons to be printed, 4th of August, 1853. Second Edition. London: John Smith Russell.

