
George Eliot, "Belles Lettres." 
[The text below is based on a scan of the first published version of Eliot's reviews, which appeared in The Westminster Review Old Series Vol. LXVI (Oct 1856): 311-319. In this issue of The Westminster, Eliot authored all of the reviews in the section "Belles Lettres," which includes extended discussion of Harriet Beecher Stowe's Dred and Charles Reade's It is Never Too Late to Mend.]

BELLES LETTRES
EVERY reader of Lessing's "Laokoon" remembers his masterly distinction between the methods of presentation in poetry and the plastic arts--the acumen and the aptness of illustration with which he shows how the difference in the materials wherewith the poet and painter or sculptor respectively work, and the difference in their mode of appeal to the mind, properly involve a difference in their treatment of a given subject. Virgil adds to the effect of his description by making his Laokoon shriek with agony; the words, clamores horrendos ad sidera tollit, do not suggest a distorted mouth, but simply intensify in our imagination the conception of suffering. But the sculptor did not attempt to render this detail, because he could have given us nothing else than the distorted mouth, which would merely have been rigid ugliness, exciting in us no tragic emotion. And the same fine instinct which has here guided the sculptor to a different method of treatment from that of the epic poet, is needed in the dramatist. "It is one thing," says Lessing, "to be told that some one shrieked, and another to hear the shriek itself." The narrative is a suggestion, and addresses the imagination only; but the dramatic representation attacks the sense. On the other hand, the poet would be under an equal mistake if he adopted all the symbolism and detail of the painter and sculptor, since he has at his command the media of speech and action, and it is the absence of these which their symbolism is intended to supply.
This reference to the "Laokoon" has been prompted by Mr. Dobell's new volume of poems, "England in Time of War." [1] In certain peculiarities of these poems we see something analogous to that mistake of confounding the methods proper to distinct arts, against which Lessing directs his trenchant arguments. Almost every critic has noticed, and noticed in order to condom, the extravagance with which the author uses that device of iteration which, under proper restraint, forms the delicately-shaded boundary where lyric poetry melts into music proper. What ear has not delighted in that refrain of Tennyson's:--
"Blow, bugles, blow, set the wild echoes flying, 
And answer, echoes, answer, dying, dying, dying!"?

Here is the song of speech in its utmost legitimate affinity with the song of pure sound; just indicating that surplus of sensation and emotion which transcends the power of articulate language and awaits its full expression in music. But Mr. Dobell's iteration, instead of escaping him as an inevitable climax, is an elaborate appliance by which he undertakes to make words perform the functions of musical notes; and he sometimes even surpasses in monotony the "burthen" of the early English and Scottish ballads. For example, we have more than a page of stanzas varying no more from each other than the two following:--
"Oh the wold, the wold,  Oh the wold, the wold,  Oh the winter stark,  Oh the level dark  On the wold, the wold, the wold!
"Oh the wold, the wold,  Oh the wold, the wold! Oh the mystery  Of the blasted tree  On the wold, the wold, the wold!" 
Iteration is a necessity to the primitive mind, because there is no other resource for the expression of persistent emotion; thought or art is not yet complex enough to clothe the same feeling in a perpetually varied form. But under a condition of high culture, this primitive monotony becomes intolerable; and when a modern writer recurs to it, the only impression he is likely to produce on his readers is, that he is inadequate to the expression of his idea through his proper medium of thought-suggesting speech, and that, unable to attain an effect by genuine art, he resorts to a mere trick; as angry people who are unable to say cutting things, fall to making faces. But Mr. Dobell gives too many proofs of power for us to attribute this practice of iteration to the negative cause of incompetence, so we must conclude it to be one of those perversities or idiosyncrasies which have condemned the productions of many a man of genius to be the predilection of the few, instead of being the delight of the many. A kindred perversity is his frequent preference of the obscure and far-fetched to that large simplicity of expression and imagery which he occasionally shows us that he can command. These are the reasons why many uncritical readers, after trying several of the poems, lay down his hook with baffled weariness; and why supercilious critics, after picking out a few extravagances, treat it with unmeasured scorn. But reviewers who pronounce "England in Time of War" a worthless or contemptible book, and who rank Mr. Dobell among the poetasters that mistake incoherence for inspiration, remind us of the worthy magistrate in "Peveril of the Peak," who wields his "Protestant flail" with immense force only to bring it round with a tremendous thump on his own skull. We are not enthusiastic admirers either of Mr. Dobell, or of the school of poetry to which he belongs, but we can at least see that he is a man of deep thought and sensibility, essentially a poet, and earnest though aberrant in the pursuit of his art;--in fact, a man who is not to be extinguished either by Mr. Gilfillan's praise or Mr. Gigadibs' condemnation.
"England in Time of War" is a series of lyrics, representing the emotions of those who are left at home to bear the passive sorrows of war, and of those who go out to brave its active perils. It is the story of the war, told, not in its outward events, but in the mental experience of the men and women who are actors and sufferers in it. We have English life in all its grades, from Lady Constance, who muses on--
 "Her love, her lord,  Leaning so grandly on his jewelled sword," 
to the milkmaid whose Harry is a likely lad to "go a sodgering." We have lyrical strains varying in loftiness from a Miltonic "Prayer of the Understanding," to the simple pathos of the old farmer's lament--
"Tis a poor world, this, boys.  And Tommy's dead." 
In many of the poems which represent peasant life, Mr. Dobell has employed the Lowland Scotch as, in his opinion, the most typical and poetical Doric; but probably the readers who will sympathise with his admiration for this dialect will be in the minority; and if we wanted proof that no dialect is necessary for suggesting to the imagination the peculiar turn and flavour of uncultured thought and feeling, we might adduce the poem just referred to, "Tommy's dead."
Much of the writing in this volume, we confess makes us impatient; it is sometimes eccentric and puerile, sometimes enigmatic--capricious ingenuity which puzzles our intellect, not poetry which coerces our souls. But we have never turned over two or three pages in irritation without being arrested by some passage of simple pathos, or of exquisite rhythmic melody laden with fresh and felicitous thought. Here is a father mourning over his son:--
"Aye, where art thou! Men, tell me of a fame  Walking the wondering nations; and they say,  When thro' the shouting people thy great name  Goes, like a chief upon a battle-day,  They shake the heavens with glory. Well-away! 
"As some poor hound that thro' thronged street and square
Pursues his loved lost lord, and fond and fast 
Seeks what he feels to be but feels not where, 
Tracks the dear feet to some closed door at last, 
And lies him down and lornest looks doth cast,--
"So I, thro' all the long tumultuous days,  Tracing thy footstep on the human sands,  O'er the signed deserts and the vocal ways  Pursue thee, faithful, thro' the echoing lands,  Wearing a wandering staff with trembling hands: 
"Thro' echoing lands that ring with victory.  And answer for the living with the dead.  And give me marble when I ask for bread.  And give me glory when I ask for thee--  It was not glory I nursed on my knee." 
A more sunny picture is "Afloat and Ashore," where we have the wife coming to meet the husband. We can only quote the latter half:--
"I have come down to thee coming to me, love. 
I stand, I stand 
On the solid sand, 
I see thee coming to me, love. 
The sea runs up to me on the sand, 
I start--'tis as if thou hadst stretched thine hand
And touched me thro' the sea, love.
I feel as if I must die,
For there's something longs to fly,
Fly and fly, to thee, love.
As the blood of the flower ere she blows
Is beating up to the sun,
And her roots do hold her down,
And it blushes and breaks undone
In a rose,
So my blood is beating in me, love!
I see thee nigh and nigher,
And my soul leaps up like sudden fire,
My life's in the air
To meet thee there,
To meet thee coming to me, love!
Over the sea,
Coming to me,
Coming, and coming to me, love!
"The boats are lowered: I leap in first,  Pull, boys, pull! or my heart will burst!  More! More!--lend me an oar!--  I'm thro' the breakers! I'm on the shore!  I see thee waiting for me, love! 
"A sudden storm  Of sighs and tears,  A clenching arm,  A look of years.  In my bosom a thousand cries,  A flash like light before my eyes,  And I am lost in thee, love!" 
The poem called "Home, wounded!" has more of the author's peculiar manner: the iteration is abundant, but less offensive than elsewhere; and we think the whole poem at once original and beautiful. The maimed hero, now in the shelter of his English home, is being wheeled out by his brother in the sunshine, talking, meanwhile, of the favourite old spots where he should like to be taken, and giving vent to his sense of repose arising from the thought that his work is done--
"And all the tedious tasked toil of the difficult long endeavour  Solved and quit by no more fine  Than these limbs of mine." 
Here is a fragment of the poem:--
" -- oh, to sit here thus in the sun,  To sit here, feeling my work is done,  While the sands of life so golden run,  And I watch the children's posies,  And my idle heart is whispering  'Bring whatever the years may bring,  The flowers will blossom the birds will sing,  And there'll always be primroses.' 
* * * * *
"My soul lies out like a basking hound,  A hound that dreams and dozes:  Along my life my length I lay,  I fill to-morrow and yesterday,  I am warm with the suns that have long since set, 
I am warm with the summers that are not yet,  And like one who dreams and dozes 
Softly afloat on a sunny sea,
Two worlds are whispering over me,
And there blows a wind of roses
From the backward shore to the shore before,
From the shore before to the backward shore,
And like two clouds that meet and pour
Each thro' each, till core in core
A single self reposes,
The nevermore with the evermore
Above me mingles and closes;
As my soul lies out like the basking hound,
And wherever it lies seems happy ground,
And when, awakened by some sweet sound,
A dreamy eye uncloses,
I see a blooming world around,
And I lie amid primroses--
Years of sweet primroses,
Springs of fresh primroses,
Springs to be, and springs for me
Of distant dim primroses."

We have three other volumes of recent verse before us. The best is "St. Bartholomew's Day, and other Poems.' [2] --unaffected, and not ungraceful. The Rev. Archer Gurney's "Songs of Early Summer" [3] are robustly commonplace, like a bed of marigolds; and Mrs. Machell's "Poems" [4] are passable vers de societe;, such as, doubtless, "friend will flatter, prudent foes forbear." We confess that these modern verses have not tempted us to linger so long over them as the selection of "Early Ballads' [5] edited by Mr. Bell--a well-chosen selection, both for interest and variety. "The old chivalry of the Marches," says the editor, "is here amply reflected. The ancient love-ballad has its popular representative; the legends of the Round Table contribute a snatch of characteristic lore; Robin Hood and Little John are exhibited under their greenwood tree, and in some of their lawless exploits; the traditions of the feuds and raids of the North, and the local tales which re-people many an ancient fortress and crumbling ruin are abundantly scattered through our pages." Clearly, a very acceptable addition to the series of slim and easily legible volumes forming the "Annotated Edition of the English Poets."
At length we have Mrs. Stowe's new novel, [6] and for the last three weeks there have been men, women, and children reading it with rapt attention--laughing and sobbing over it--lingering with delight over its exquisite landscapes, its scenes of humour and tenderness, and rude heroism--and glowing with indignation at its terrible representation of chartered barbarities. Such a book is an uncontrollable power, and critics who follow it with their objections and reservations--who complain that Mrs. Stowe's plot is defective, that she has repeated herself, that her book is too long and too full of hymns and religions dialogue, and that it creates an unfair bias--are something like men pursuing a prairie fire with desultory watering-cans. In the meantime, "Dred" will be devoured by the million, who carry no critical talisman against the enchantments of genius. We confess ourselves to be among the million, and quite unfit to rank with the sage minority of Fadladeens. We have been too much moved by "Dred" to determine with precision how far it is inferior to "Uncle Tom;" too much impressed by what Mrs. Stowe has done to be quite sure that we can tell her what she ought to have done. Our admiration of the book is quite distinct from any opinions or hesitations we may have as to the terribly difficult problems of Slavery and Abolition--problems which belong to quite other than "polite literature." Even admitting Mrs. Stowe to be mistaken in her views, and partial or exaggerated in her representations, "Dred" remains not the less a novel inspired by a rare genius--rare both in intensity and in range of power.
Looking at the matter simply from an artistic point of view, we see no reason to regret that Mrs. Stowe should keep to her original ground of negro and planter life, any more than that Scott should have introduced Highland life into "Rob Roy" and "The Fair Maid of Perth," when he had already written "Waverley." Mrs. Stowe has invented the Negro novel, and it is a "novel not only fresh in its scenery and its manners, but possessing that conflict of races which Augustan Thierry has pointed out as the great source of romantic interest--witness "Ivanhoe." Inventions in literature are not as plentiful as inventions in the paletot and waterproof department, and it is rather amusing that we reviewers, who have, for the most part, to read nothing but imitations of imitations, should put on airs of tolerance towards Mrs. Stowe because she has written a second Negro novel, and make excuses for her on the ground that she perhaps would not succeed in any other kind of fiction. Probably she would not; for her genius seems to be of a very special character: her "Sunny Memories" were as feeble as her novels are powerful. But whatever else she may write, or may not write, "Uncle Tom "and "Dred" will assure her a place in that highest rank of novelists who can give us a national life in all its phases--popular and aristocratic, humorous and tragic, political and religious.
But Mrs. Stowe's novels have not only that grand element--conflict of races; they have another element equally grand, which she also shares with Scott, and in which she has, in some respects, surpassed him. This is the exhibition of a people to whom what we may call Hebraic Christianity is still a reality, still an animating belief, and by whom the theocratic conceptions of the Old Testament are literally applied to their daily life. Where has Scott done anything finer than the character of Balfour of Burley, the battles of Drumelog and Bothwell Brigg, and the trial of Ephraim MacBriar? And the character of Dred, the death scenes in the Swamp, and the Camp Meeting of Presbyterians and Methodists, will bear comparison--if we except the fighting--with the best parts of "Old Mortality." The strength of Mrs. Stowe's own religious feeling is a great artistic advantage to her here; she never makes you feel that she is coldly calculating an effect, but you see that she is all a-glow for the moment with the wild enthusiasm, the unreasoning faith, and the steady martyr-spirit of Dred, of Tiff, or of Father Dickson. But with this, she has the keen sense of humour which preserves her from extravagance and monotony; and though she paints her religious negroes en beau, they are always specifically negroes--she never loses hold of her characters, and lets dramatic dialogue merge into vague oratory. Indeed, here is her strongest point: her dramatic instinct is always awake; and whether it is the grotesque Old Tiff or the aerial Nina, the bluff sophist Father Bonim or the gentlemanly sophist Frank Russell, her characters are always like themselves; a quality which is all the more remarkable in novels animated by a vehement polemical purpose.
The objection which is patent to every one who looks at Mrs. Stowe's novels in an argumentative light, is also, we think, one of their artistic defects; namely, the absence of any proportionate exhibition of the negro character in its less amiable phases. Judging from her pictures one would conclude that the negro race was vastly superior to the mass of whites, even in other than slave countries--a state of the case which would singularly defeat Mrs. Stowe's sarcasms on the cant of those who call Slavery a "Christianizing Institution." If the negroes are really so very good, slavery has answered as moral discipline. But apart from the argumentative suicide involved in this one-sidedness, Mrs. Stowe loses by it the most terribly tragic element in the relation of the two races--the Nemesis lurking in the vices of the oppressed. She alludes to demoralization among the slaves, but she does not depict it; and yet why should she shrink from this, since she does not shrink from giving us a full-length portrait of a Legree or a Tom Gordon?
It would be idle to tell anything about the story of a work which is, or soon will be, in all our readers' hands; we only render our tribute to it as a great novel, leaving to others the task of weighing it in the political balance.
Close upon "Dred," we have read Mr. Charles Reade's novel--"It is Never Too Late to Mend;" [7] also a remarkable fiction, and one that sets vibrating very deep chords in our nature, yet presenting a singular contrast with "Dred," both in manner and in the essential qualities it indicates in the writer. Mr. Reade's novel opens with some of the true pathos to be found in English country life: the honest young farmer, George Fielding, unable to struggle against "bad times," and an exhausted farm, is driven to Australia to seek the fortune that will enable him to marry Susan Merton, the woman he loves. It then carries us, with a certain Robinson, a clever thief, who has been rusticating as George Fielding's lodger, to the gaol, and makes as shudder at the horrors of the separate and silent system, administered by an ignorant and brutal gaoler, while we follow with keen interest the struggle of the heroic chaplain against this stupid iniquity--thus bringing home the tragedy of Birmingham gaol to people whose sympathies are more easily roused by fiction than by bare fact. Then it takes us to Australia, and traces George Fielding's fortunes and misfortunes--first through the vicissitudes of the Australian "sheep-run," and then through the fierce drama of gold-digging--bringing him home at last with four thousand pounds in his pocket, in time to prevent his Susan from marrying his worst enemy.
In all the three "acts" of this novel, so to speak, there are fine situations, fine touches of feeling, and much forcible writing; especially while the scene is in the gaol, the best companion who drops in you will probably regard as a bore, and will become earnest in inviting to remain only when you perceive he is determined to go. Again, honest George Fielding's struggles, renewed at the antipodes, and lightened by the friendship of Carlo the dog--of the reformed thief, Robinson--and of the delightful "Jacky," the Australian native--are a thread of interest which you pursue with eagerness to the denouement. "Jacky" is a thoroughly fresh character, entirely unlike any other savage frotte de civilisation, and drawn with exquisite yet sober humour. In the English scenes every one who has seen anything of life amongst our farmers, will recognise many truthful, well-observed touches: the little "tiff" between the brothers George and William Fielding, old Morton's way of thinking, and many traits of manner in the heroine, Susan Merton. In short, "It is Never Too Late to Mend," is one of the exceptional novels to be read not merely by the idle and the half-educated, but by the busy and the thoroughly informed.
Nevertheless, Mr. Reade's novel does not rise above the level of cleverness: we feel throughout the presence of remarkable talent, which makes effective use of materials, but nowhere of the genius which absorbs material, and reproduces it as a living whole, in which you do not admire the ingenuity of the workman, but the vital energy of the producer. Doubtless there is a great deal of nonsense talked about genius and inspiration, as if genius did not and must not labour; but, after all, there remains the difference between the writer who thoroughly possesses you by his creation, and the writer who only awakens your curiosity and makes you recognise his ability; and this difference may as well be called "genius" as anything else. Perhaps a truer statement of the difference is, that the one writer is himself thoroughly possessed by his creation--he lives in his characters; while the other remains outside them, and dresses them up. Here lies the fundamental contrast between Mrs. Stowe's novel and Mr. Reade's. Mrs. Stowe seems for the moment to glow with all the passion, to quiver with all the fun, and to be inspired with all the trust that belong to her different characters; she attains her finest dramatic effects by means of her energetic sympathy, and not by conscious artifice. Mr. Reade, on the contrary, seems always self-conscious, always elaborating a character after a certain type, and carrying his elaboration a little too far--always working up to situations, and over-doing them. The habit of writing for the stage misleads him into seeking after those exaggerated contrasts and effects which are accepted as a sort of rapid symbolism by a theatrical audience, but are utterly out of place in a fiction, where the time and means for attaining a result are less limited, and an impression of character or purpose may be given more nearly as it is in real life--by a sum of less concentrated particulars. In Mr. Reade's dialogue we are constantly imagining that we see a theatrical gentleman, well "made-up," delivering a repartee in an emphatic voice, with his eye fixed on the pit. To mention one brief example:-- Hawes, the gaoler, tells Fry, the turnkey, after Mr. Eden's morning sermon on theft, that he approves of preaching at people. The same day there is an afternoon sermon on cruelty; whereupon Hawes remarks again to Fry, "I'll teach him to preach at people from the pulpit." "Well," answers Fry, "that is what I say, Sir: but you said you liked him to preach at folk?" "So I do," replied Hawes, angrily, "but not at me, ye fool!" This would produce a roar on the stage, and would seem a real bit of human nature; but in a novel one has time to be sceptical as to this extreme naivete, which allows a man to make palpable epigrams on himself.
In everything, Mr. Reade seems to distrust the effect of moderation and simplicity. His picture of gaol life errs by excess, and he wearies our emotion by taxing it too repeatedly; the admirable inspiration which led him to find his hero and heroine among Berkshire homesteads is counteracted by such puerile and incongruous efforts at the romantic and diabolical, as the introduction of the Jew, Isaac Levi, who is a mosaic character in more senses than one, and the farseeing Machiavelianism of the top-booted Mr. Meadows; and even when he is speaking in his own person, he lashes himself into a fury at human wrongs, and calls on God and man to witness his indignation, apparently confounding the importance of the effect with the importance of the cause. But the most amazing foible in a writer of so much power as Mr. Reade, is his reliance on the magic of typography. We had imagined that the notion of establishing a relation between magnitude of ideas and magnitude of type was confined to the literature  of placards, but we find Mr. Reade endeavouring to impress us with the Titanic character of modern events by suddenly bursting into capitals at the mention of "THIS GIGANTIC AGE!" It seems ungrateful in us to notice these minor blemishes in a work which has given us so much pleasure, and aroused in us so much healthy feeling, as "It is Never Too Late to Mend;" but it is our very admiration of Mr. Reade's talent which makes these blemishes vexatious to us, and which induces us to appeal against their introduction in the many other books we hope to have from his pen.
Another novel by a writer whose books are justly opened with agreeable expectations, is "Young Singleton." [8] The conception of this novel--the idea of tracing the operation of morbid vanity in an impressionable nature of mixed English and Hindoo blood, from boyhood to maturity--is fresh and excellent. The unheroic hero is introduced to us in his small "skeleton" jacket and trousers, newly sent from India by his father ,the Nabob, under the care of a Hindoo servant, and we see him through his career at school and college, and as heir of his father's wealth, always the victim of the uneasy vanity that craves distinction just where Nature has denied it, hating all who consciously or unconsciously thwart this vanity, and inwardly flinging at them the anathema of his childhood, "You are nasty things, and I hate you;" till at last a moment of temptation reveals the terrible possibilities of crime that lie in the indulgence of trivial egoism, and, to avenge his galled vanity, he allows his best friend to drown when he might save him by stretching out his hand. Throughout the novel the situations are at once striking and natural, and the characters are all specific; yet, notwithstanding these merits, it does not impress us as a success. The outline is vigorous, but the filling up is often feeble; the story shows a power of construction without an adequate power of detail, and it reminds us of a play schemed by an able dramatist but written by an inefficient collaborator.
The appearance of a new novel by Miss Bremer, [9] revives the impression of ten years ago, when all the novel-reading world was-discussing the merits of "The Neighbours," "The President's Daughters," "The H-- Family," and the rest of the "Swedish novels," which about that time were creating a strong current in the literary and bookselling world. The discussion soon died out; and perhaps there is hardly another instance of fictions so eagerly read in England which have left so little trace in English literature as Miss Bremer's. No one quotes them, no one alludes to them: and grave people who have entered on their fourth decade, remember their enthusiasm for the Swedish novels among those intellectual "wild oats" to which their mature wisdom can afford to give a pitying smile. And yet, how is this? For Miss Bremer had not only the advantage of describing manners which were fresh to the English public; she also brought to the description unusual gifts --lively imagination, poetic feeling, wealth of language, a quick eye for details, and considerable humour, of that easy, domestic kind which throws a pleasant light on every-day things. The perusal of "Hertha" has confirmed in our minds the answer we should have previously given to our own question. One reason, we think, why Miss Bremer's novels have not kept a high position among us is, that her luxuriant faculties are all overrun by a rank growth of sentimentality, which, like some faint-smelling creeper on the boughs of an American forest, oppresses us with the sense that the air is unhealthy. Nothing can be more curious than the combination in her novels of the vapourishly affected and unreal with the most solid Dutch sort of realism. In one page we have copious sausage sandwiches and beer posset, and on another rhapsodies or wildly improbable incidents that seem rather to belong to sylphs and salamanders, than to a race of creatures who are nourished by the very excellent provisions just mentioned. Another reason why Miss Bremer's novels are not likely to take rank among the permanent creations of art, is the too confident tone of the religions philosophy which runs through them. When a novelist is quite sure that she has a theory which suffices to illustrate all the difficulties of our earthly existence, her novels are too likely to illustrate little else than her own theory.
These two characteristics of sentimentality and dogmatic confidence are very strongly marked in "Hertha," while it has less of the attention to detail, less of the humorous realism, which was the ballast of Miss Bremer's earlier novels. It has been written not simply from an artistic impulse, but with the object of advocating the liberation of woman from those legal and educational restrictions which limit her opportunities of a position and a sphere of usefulness to the chance of matrimony; and we think there are few well-judging persons who will not admire the generous energy with which Miss Bremer, having long ago won fame and independence for herself, devotes the activity of her latter years to the cause of women who are less capable of mastering circumstance. Many wise and noble things she says in "Hertha," but we cannot help regretting that she has not presented her views on a difficult and practical question in the "light of common day," rather than in the pink haze of visions and romance. The story is very briefly this:--
Hertha, who has lost her mother in childhood, is, at the age of seven-and-twenty, becoming more and more embittered by her inactive bondage to a narrow-minded, avaricious father, who demands obedience to the pettiest exactions. Her elder sister, Alma, is slowly dying in consequence of the same tyranny, which has prevented her from marrying the man she loves. We meet our heroine, with her gloomy and bitter expression of face, first of all, at the rehearsal of a fancy ball, which is to take place in a few days in the good town of Kungskoping; and after being introduced to the various dramatis persona--among the rest, to a young man named Yngve Nordin, who interests Hertha by his agreement in her opinions about women, we accompany her to her cheerless home, where she is roughly chid by her father, the rigid old Director, for being later than the regulation-hour of eight; and where, by the bedside of her sister Alma, she pours out all the bitterness of her soul, all her hatred and smothered rebellion towards her father for his injustice towards them. She and Alma have inherited a share in their mother's fortune, but according to the Swedish law they are still minors, and unable to claim their property. This very night, however, a fire breaks out, and lays waste a large district of the town. The Director's house is consumed, and he himself is only saved by the heroic exertions of Hertha, who rushes to his room, and carries his meagre, feeble body through the flames. This act of piety, and the death of Alma, who, in her last moments, extracts from her father a promise to give Hertha independence, win some ungracious concessions from the crabbed Director towards his daughter. He still withholds her property and a declaration of her majority; but she has power in the household, and greater freedom of action out of doors. A Ladies' Society has been organized for relieving the sufferers from the fire, and Hertha is one of those whose department is the care of the sick and wounded. The patient who falls to her share is no other than Yngve Nordin, who has been severely hurt in his benevolent efforts on the fatal night, and is now lodged in the house of the good pastor, who is at the head of the "Society." Here is an excellent opportunity for discovering that Yngve is just the friend she needs to soothe and invigorate her mind, by his sympathy and riper experience; and the feeling which is at first called friendship, is at last confessed to be love. After certain jealousies and suspicions, which are satisfactorily cleared up, Yngve asks the Director for Hertha's hand, but is only accepted prospectively, on condition of his attaining an assured position. Yngve goes abroad, and for seven years Hertha submits to the procrastination of her marriage, rather than rebel against her father in his last years. It is only when Yngve is hopelessly ill that she sacrifices her scruples and marries him. In the mean time she has made her seven years of separation rich in active usefulness, by founding and superintending two schools--one in which girls are instructed in the ordinary elements of education, forming a sort of nursery-garden for the other, in which voluntary pupils are to be led to a higher order of thought and purpose by Hertha's readings, conversation, and personal influence. Her schools are successful; but after Yngve's death she begins to sink under her long trial, and follows him rapidly to the grave.
This bare outline of the story can only suggest and not fully explain the grounds of our objection to "Hertha." Our objection is, that it surrounds questions, which can only be satisfactorily solved by the application of very definite ideas to specific facts, with a cloudy kind of eloquence and flighty romance. Take, for example, the question whether it will not be well for women to study and practise medicine. It can only tend to retard the admission that women may pursue such a career with success, for a distinguished authoress to imply that they may be suitably prepared for effective activity by lectures on such a very nebulous thesis as this--"The consciousness of thought ought to be a living observation and will," or to associate the attendance of women by the sick bed, not with the hard, drudgery of real practice, but with the vicissitudes of a love-story. Women have not to prove that they can be emotional, and rhapsodic, and spiritualistic; every one believes that already. They have to prove that they are capable of accurate thought, severe study, and continuous self-command. But we say all this with reluctance, and should prefer noticing the many just and pathetic observations that Miss Bremer puts into the mouth of her heroine. We can only mention, and have not space to quote, a passage where Hertha complains of the ignorance in which women are left of Natural Science. "In my youth," she concludes, "I used to look at the rocks, the trees, the grass, and all objects of nature, with unspeakable longing, wishing to know something about their kinds, their life, and their purpose. But the want of knowledge, the want of opportunity to acquire it, has caused nature to be to me a sealed book, and still to this moment it is to me a tantalizing, enticing, and ever-retreating wave, rather than a life-giving fountain which I can enjoy, and enjoying, thank the Creator."
Side by side with the latest publication of a very mature authoress, we have what may possibly be the first publication of a young authoress. If so, "Erlesmere" [10] is a book of remarkable promise. It bears the stamp of unusual insight and culture, and of a mind that possesses some important qualifications of the novelist. Setting aside certain awkward affectations--compound words which are innovations without being acquisitions, and which happily diminish as we advance in the book, the style is vigorous and often graceful, the dialogue easy and appropriate. The writer has a sense of character and an eye for characteristics; she knows what she means to paint, and her touches, though not always felicitous, are laid on with a firm hand. Still, "Erlesmere" is not likely to be popular, nor is it, on the whole, a good novel. The imagination of the ordinary novel-reader will not be strongly arrested at the outset: and, unhappily, it is here that he will find the affectations, or rather eccentricities of style that it will probably repel him; he will be afraid that he is going to have rather too much of the priggish Emersonian Mr. Harley, and will even suspect that the authoress herself has an excessive admiration for that moderately agreeable personage; so that there is great risk of his laying down the first volume in discouragement before he has reached the middle. On the other hand, the novel-reader extraordinary, who is keenly alive to every trait of originality, who detects at once the touch of the true artist, though the picture, as a whole, may be crude, will be disappointed that the writer has had recourse at last to melodramatic effects which are as hackneyed as other parts of the book are fresh and spontaneous. Nevertheless, the author of "Erlesmere" is one of that minority among novelists to whom such readers will say, "More, give me more." Her first attempt is not in itself satisfactory, but it creates a belief in her powers.
Before we quit fiction, let us mention the translation of Madame de Girardin's "Stories of an Old Maid, related to her Nephews and Nieces." [11] We cannot better indicate the charm of these stories than by quoting the writer's own words:--
"I do not say, as many do who have written for young folks,--'I have meditated long upon the character of children; my life has been a constant study of these interesting little creatures,'--I say nothing of the sort: I merely observe, I have been a child; and as nobody can deny me this advantage, I presume upon it to recall to my mind the emotions of that happy age, and speak to you as if I were living in it."
The book is very elegantly got up, with abundant pictures, and is a present that we envy any aunt or uncle the pleasure of bestowing.
If any reader, tired of feverish and flaccid literature, is looking out for some cool, hard, practical sense, with the smallest possible alloy of sentiment, we can recommend to him the stout volume into which Bacon's "Essays" are swelled by Archbishop Whately's "Annotations." [12] If we were captiously inclined, we might complain that these annotations are so often made up of citations from the Archbishop's own writings; but a veteran writer has his privileges as well as a veteran talker who recites his own mots, or a veteran general who is a little too fond of fighting his battles "o'er again." Quite a charming quality in these annotations is their abundance of appropriate and easy illustration: a grave or difficult subject is lighted up by some ingenious analogy from common experience, or by some case in point from such books as "Sandford and Merton," or Miss Austen's novels; and the most ordinary observations of anecdotes are made fresh by novelty of application. For example:--
"Whatever a man may be, intellectually, he labours under this disadvantage if he is of low moral principle, that he knows only the weak and bad parts of human nature, and not the better.
"It was remarked by an intelligent Roman Catholic that the Confessional trains the priest to a knowledge, not of human nature, but of mental nosology. 'It may therefore qualify them,' he said, 'for the treatment of the depraved, but not of a pure mind.'
"Now, what the Confessional is to the priest, that, a knave's own heart is to him. He can form no notion of a nobler nature than his own. He is like the goats in Robinson Crusoe's island, who saw clearly everything below them, but very imperfectly what was above them, so that Robinson Crusoe could never get at them from the valleys, but when he came upon them from the hill-top, took them quite by surprise."
And here is another instance of a similar kind, a propos of Bacon's observation that "the ripeness or unripeness of the occasion must ever be well weighed":--
"It is a common phrase with the undiscriminating advocates of delay, that 'The World is not yet ripe for such and such a measure.' But they usually forget to inquire 'Is it ripening? When, and how, is it likely to become ripe? or, Are men's minds to ripen like winter pears, merely by laying them by, and letting them alone?'
"'Time,' as Bishop Copleston has remarked (Remains, p. 123), 'is no agent.' When we speak of such and such changes being brought about by time, we mean in time,--by the gradual and imperceptible operation of some gentle agency. We should observe, therefore, whether there is any such agency at work, and in what direction;-- whether to render a certain change more difficult or easier. If you are surrounded by the waters, and want to escape, you should observe whether the tide is flowing or ebbing. In the one case, you should at once attempt the ford, at all hazards; in the other, you have to wait patiently. And if the water be still, and neither rising nor falling, then you should consider that though there is no danger of drowning, you must remain insulated for ever, unless you can cross the ford; and that if this is to be done at all, it may be as well done at once."
The annotator often sustains admirably the note struck by the text, in the acuteness of his practical suggestions and the causticity with which he characterizes the ordinary motives and devices of men. Thus, in the annotations on the Essay "Of Negotiating," he says,--
"In proposing any scheme, the best way is, to guard, in the first instance, against cavils or details, and establish, first, that some thing of such and such a character is desirable; then proceeding to settle each of the particular points of detail, one by one. And this is the ordinary course of experienced men; who, as it were, cut a measure into mouthfuls, that it may be the more readily swallowed; dividing the whole measure into a series of resolutions; each of which will perhaps pass by a large majority, though the whole at once, if proposed at once as a whole, might have been rejected. For supposing it to consist of four clauses, A, B, C, and D; if out of an assembly of one hundred persons, twenty are opposed to clause A, and eighty in favour of it, and the like with B, and with C, and D, then, if the whole were put to the vote at once, there would be a majority of eighty to twenty against it: whereas, if divided, there would be that majority in favour of it.
"It is fairly to be required, however, that a man should really have--though he may not think it wise to produce it in the first instance--some definite plan for carrying into effect whatever he proposes. Else, he may be one of another class of persons as difficult to negotiate with, and as likely to baffle any measure, as the preceding. There are some, and not a few, who cast scorn on any sober practical scheme by drawing bright pictures of a Utopia which can never be realized, either from their having more of imagination than judgment, or from a deliberate design to put one out of conceit with everything that is practicable, in order that nothing may be done.
"E.g. 'What is wanted, is, not this and that improvement in the mode of electing Members of Parliament,--but a Parliament consisting of truly honest, enlightened, and patriotic men. It is vain to talk of any system of Church government, or of improved Church-discipline, or any alterations in our Services, or revision of the Bible translation; what we want is a zealous and truly evangelical ministry, who shall assiduously inculcate on all the people pure Gospel doctrine. It is vain to cast cannon and to raise troops; what is wanted for the successful conduct of the war, is an army of well-equipped and well-disciplined men, under the command of generals who are thoroughly masters of the art of war,' &c, And thus one may, in every department of life, go on indefinitely making fine speeches that can lead to no practical result, except to create a disgust for everything that is practical.
"When (in 1832) public attention was called to the enormous mischiefs arising from the system of Transportation, we were told in reply, in a style of florid and indignant declamation, that the real cause of all the enormities complained of, was, a want of sufficient fear of God;(!) and that the only remedy wanted was, an increased fear of God! As if, when the unhealthiness of some locality had been pointed out, and a suggestion had been thrown out for providing sewers, and draining marshes, it had been replied that the root of the evil was, a prevailing want of health;--that it was strange, this--the true cause--should have been overlooked;--and that the remedy of all would be to provide restored health!
"As for the penal colonies, all that is required to make them efficient, is, we must suppose, to bring in a Bill enacting that 'Whereas, &c, be it therefore enacted, that from and after the first of January next ensuing, all persons shall fear God!'"
But when Archbishop Whately attempts to transfer his causticity from the region of practice to that of speculation, he is often singularly infelicitous. In his preface to this volume, he is severe on the English and American writers, whom he calls "children of the mist," and "who bring forward their speculations--often very silly, and not seldom very mischievous--under cover of the twilight;" and you naturally imagine that he is going to adduce some very vague and flighty passages of the "Pogram" school; but instead of this he quotes a passage, metaphysical indeed, but not more "misty "than the definitions of mathematics, since it is simply a varied statement and illustration of the position, that every idea involves a positive and negative, and the middle term constituted by their relation. The meaning of the writer may be futile, but at any rate his meaning is clearly stated; and it seems to us singular that a theologian who believes in the Trinity, should venture on satirizing the position that "Three in one is the deepest-lying cipher of the universe," by the quotation,--
"Lo, down thy hill, romantic Ashbourne, glides 
The Derby Dilly carrying three insides."

A very different volume of miscellaneous contents is that of Professor Wilson's "Essays, Critical and Imaginative." [13] We found this volume delightful reading when we were in need of that best of all relaxations, an intellectual laugh; and to any one who is the least peevish or dull, we recommend a dose of Wilson's hearty, rollicking humour in the articles on "Meg Dods's Cookery," "Gymnastics," "Health and Longevity," and "Death in the Pot." His fun is hardly ever subtle or sly, twinkling in the eyes while the mouth is grave; yet now and then we get a more subdued and indirect touch of humour, that reminds us of Charles Lamb. Thus, a propos of the maxim, "Up with the sun and down with the sun," he says, "Let the solar system, say we, mind its own business, and let us mind ours. There is room enough in the universe for us all. Because an immense globe of fire, or luminous matter, of one kind or another, ever so many millions of miles off, chances to set at a given hour, is that any reason why you must set too, who are close at hand, and not of luminous matter? We hold that it is as reasonable to sit up with the stars as to lie down with the sun. . . . But nothing like a general system of rules for the guidance of human life can be deduced from the motions of the heavenly bodies." Among the more serious contents of this volume, is the excellent appreciation of Wordsworth, especially interesting because it was given in advance of the general voice.
Mr. Bohn contributes, as usual, to the stock of cheap and solid literature. Besides a volume of the "Orations of Demosthenes," [14] and the concluding half of "Quintilian's Institutes," [15] he gives us a charming edition of "Walton and Cotton's Complete Angler," [16] edited by Mr. Jesse, with numerous and very often excellent illustrations. Quaintly delightful pages! which one may enjoy without having any piscatorial enthusiasm--without having angled for anything more solid than a compliment. But the majority of readers, probably, care for the sport, and to such readers Mr. Bohn's "Notes on Fishing Waters" will be a welcome appendix.
To students of German we can recommend Dr. Ernst Meier's "History of the Poetical Literature of the Hebrews," [17] which is popular and compact, without being slight and superficial. Certain theoretic differences which the reader may have with Dr. Meier as to the primitive character of the Hebrew monotheism, will not prevent him from finding this volume a very serviceable companion in the study of the Old Testament. It is pleasant to get a serious German work of which we can see the end; for German writers too often oblige us to pay a heavy premium for the thoroughness with which they do their work, by making us wait an indefinite space of time between a first and second volume; and sometimes, indeed, the erster theil remains to the end in a state of melancholy bachelorhood.

[1] "England in Time of War." By Sydney Dobell, Author of "Balder," and "The Roman." London: Smith and Elder.
[2] "St. Bartholomew's Day, and other Poems." By Stewart Lockyer. London: Saunders and Otley. 
[3] "Songs of Early Summer." By the Rev. Archer Gurney. London: Longman and Co.
[4] "Poems and Translations." By Mrs. Machell, late Mrs. Torre Holme. London: J. W. Parker and Son.
[5] "Early Ballads, Illustrative of History, Traditions, and Customs." Edited by Robert Bell. London: J. W. Parker and Son.
[6] "Dred; a Tale of the Great Dismal Swamp." By Harriet Beecher Stowe. London: Sampson Low and Co.
[7] "It is Never Too Late to Mend." A Matter of Fact Romance. By Charles Reade. In Three Vols. Bentley.
[8] "Young Singleton." By Talbot Gwynne. In Two Volumes. London: Smith and Elder. 
[9] "Hertha." By Frederika Bremer. Translated by Mary Howitt. London: Hall, Virtue, and Co.
[10] "Erlesmere; or, Contrasts of Character." By L. S. Lavenu. London: Smith and Elder.
[12] "Stories of an Old Maid, related to her Nephews and Nieces." Translated from the French of Madame Emile de Girardin. By Alfred Elwes. London: Addey and Co.
[12] "Bacon's Essays; with Annotations." By R. Whately, D.D., Archbishop of Dublin. London: J. W. Parker and Son.
[13] "Essays, Critical and Imaginative." By Professor Wilson. Vol. 1. Edinburgh: Blackwood and Sons.
[14] "The Orations of Demosthenes against the Law of Leptines, Midias, Androtion, and Aristocrates." Translated, with Notes, &c, by Charles Rainer Kennedy. London: Bohn's Classical Library.
[15] "Quintilian's Institutes of Oratory." Translated by the Rev. John Selby Watson. Vol. II. London: Bohn's Classical Library.
[16] "Walton's Complete Angler." Edited by Edward Jesse, Esq. London: Bohn's Illustrated Library.
[17] "Geschichte der Poetischen National Literatur der Hebraer." Von Dr. Ernst Meier. London: Williams and Norgate.



